Astrophysics and Space Science Proceedings
African Cultural Astronomy
Current Archaeoastronomy
and Ethnoastronomy research in Africa



Jarita C. Holbrook
Editor

University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ, USA

R. Thebe Medupe
Editor

University of Cape Town, Rondebosch, South Africa

Johnson O. Urama
Editor

University of Nigeria Nsukka, Enuga State, Nigeria
Editors
Jarita C. Holbrook                                 R. Thebe Medupe
University of Arizona                              University of Cape Town
Tucson, AZ                                         Rondebosch
USA                                                South Africa

Johnson O. Urama
University of Nigeria Nsukka
Enuga State
Nigeria




ISBN: 978-1-4020-6638-2               e-ISBN: 978-1-4020-6639-9

Library of Congress Control Number: 2007936372


c 2008 Springer Science+Business Media B.V.

No part of this work may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted
in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, microfilming, recording
or otherwise, without written permission from the Publisher, with the exception
of any material supplied specifically for the purpose of being entered
and executed on a computer system, for exclusive use by the purchaser of the work.

Printed on acid-free paper.


9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

springer.com
Contents




Chasing the Shadow of the Moon: The 2006 Ghana Eclipse Conference . . .                                                       1
Jarita C. Holbrook


Part I: Cultural Astronomy Research Lessons


The Use of Ethnographic Methods in Cultural Astronomy Research . . . . . 21
Barth Chukwuezi

A Brief Outline on the Geographical Background of Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
Basil U. Eze

The Astronomical Gnomon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
J. McKim Malville

Naked-eye Astronomy for Cultural Astronomers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
J. C. Holbrook and Audra Baleisis

Leadership . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 77
Shawna Holbrook

Integrating African Cultural Astronomy into the Classroom . . . . . . . . . . . . 83
Sanlyn Buxner and Shawna Holbrook

A Contemporary Approach to Teaching Eclipses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 95
Timothy F. Slater

Teaching Cultural Astronomy: On the Development and Evolution
of the Syllabus at Bath Spa University and the University of Wales,
Lampeter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 109
Nick Campion


                                                                                                                              v
vi                                                                                                                  Contents

Part II Current Research in African Cultural Astronomy

Evidence of Ancient African Beliefs in Celestial Bodies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 121
Felix A. Chami
Astronomy of Nabta Playa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 131
J. McKim Malville, Romauld Schild, Fred Wendorf and Robert Brenmer
Romans, Astronomy and the Qibla: Urban Form and Orientation
of Islamic Cities of Tunisia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 145
M. E. Bonine

The Timbuktu Astronomy Project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 179
Rodney Thebe Medupe, Brian Warner, Shamil Jeppie, Salikou Sanogo,
 Mohammed Maiga, Ahmed Maiga, Mamadou Dembele, Drissa Diakite,
 Laya Tembely, Mamadou Kanoute, Sibiri Traore, Bernard Sodio
 and Sharron Hawkes
The Cosmological Vision of the Yoruba-Idààcha of Benin Republic
(West Africa): A Light on Yoruba History and Culture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 189
Aimé Dafon Sègla
The Relationship Between Human Destiny and the Cosmic Forces – A
Study of the IGBO Worldview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 209
Barth Chukwuezi
Cultural Astronomy in the Lore and Literature of Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 217
Damian. U. Opata
Astronomy and Culture in Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 231
J. O. Urama
Participation and Research of Astronomers and Astrophysicists
of Black African Descent (1900–2005) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 239
Hakeem M. Oluseyi and Johnson Urama

Index . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 257
Contributors




Audra Baleisis                          Drissa Diakite
University of Arizona                   Faculte des Sciences et Techniques
                                        Universite de Bamako, Mali
M.E. Bonine
University of Arizona
                                        Basil U. Eze
Robert Brenmer                          Department of Geography and
40, Kingsway, Aldwick                   Meteorology, Enugu State
West Sussex P021 4DL, U.K               University of Science and Technology,
                                        Enugu, Nigeria
Sanlyn Buxner
University of Arizona                   Sharron Hawkes
                                        Dogged Films, Johannesburg,
Nick Campion
                                        South Africa
Director of the Sophia Centre for the
Study Cosmology in Culture, and
Senior Lecturer in Archaeology and      Jarita C Holbrook
Anthropology,                           Bureau of Applied Research
University of Wales, Lampeter, UK.      in Anthropology University of Arizona
E-mail: n.campion@lamp.ac.uk            Email: holbrook@u.arizona.edu
                                        FAX: +1-520-621-9608
Felix A. Chami
History/Archaeology Department,         Shawna Holbrook
University of Dar es Salam              International Foundation for Education
E-mail: fchami@udsm.ac.tz               and Self-Help (IFESH), Benin
Barth Chukwuezi
                                        Shamil Jeppie
Association of Professor
                                        History Department
Department Of Sociology/
                                        University of Cape Town
Anthropology, University Of Nigeria
                                        South Africa
Nsukka

Mamadou Dembele                         Mamadou Kanoute
Faculte des Sciences et Techniques      Faculte des Sciences et Techniques
Universite de Bamako, Mali              Universite de Bamako, Mali

                                                                             vii
viii                                                                Contributors

Ahmed Maiga                              Timothy F. Slater
Faculte des Sciences et Techniques       University of Arizona,
Universite de Bamako, Mali               933 N. cherry Ave., Tucson,
                                         AZ 85721 USA,
Mohammed Maiga                           Telephone: (520) 621-7096
Faculte des Sciences et Techniques       Fax (520) 621-1532
Universite de Bamako, Mali
                                         Bernard Sodio
J. McKim Malville
                                         Faculte des Sciences et Techniques
University of Colorado
                                         Universite de Bamako, Mali
(303) 492-8766
E-mail: kim.malville@colorado.edu
                                         Laya Tembely
Rodney Thebe Medupe                      Faculte des Sciences et Techniques
Astronomy Department                     Universite de Bamako, Mali
University of Cape Town
E-mail: thebe@saao.ac.za                 Sibiri Traore
                                         Faculte des Sciences et Techniques
Hakeem M. Oluseyi                        Universite de Bamako, Mali
Florida Institute of Technology
(321) 674-7247                           Johnson Urama
E-mail: holuseyi@fit.edu                 Department of Physics
                                         and Astronomy
Salikou Sanogo                           University of Nigeria, Nsukka
Faculte des Sciences et Techniques
Universite de Bamako, Mali               Brian Warner
                                         Astronomy Department
Romauld Schild
                                         University of Cape Town
Institute of Archaeology and Ethnology
                                         E-mail: thebe@saao.ac.za
Polish Academy of Science, Warsaw

Aimé Dafon Sègla                       Fred Wendorf
ORKESTRA Consulting                      Department of Anthropology
16 Place de la Madeleine                 Southern Methodist University, Dallas
75008 Paris
Tel: 01 44 51 51 53/57                   Damian. U. Opata
Portable: 06 19 31 87 42                 Department of English
E-mail: a s aime@yahoo.fr,               and Literary Studies,
asegla@orkestra.biz,                     University of Nigeria, Nsukka, Nigeria
aime.segla@ethnologie.uni-halle.de       E-mail: optdamian@fastmail.fm
Chasing the Shadow of the Moon: The 2006
Ghana Eclipse Conference

Jarita C. Holbrook




Abstract The March 29, 2006, total solar eclipse was a celestial event fortuitously
passing over many of the most modern countries of West Africa: Ghana, Togo,
Benin, and Nigeria. For those of us researching the cultural astronomy of Africans, it
fit into our discourse: a rare celestial event to which Africans would be responding.
And, we upped the ante by organizing a conference on the cultural astronomy of
Africans for the week of the eclipse. This report details the process of creating
the first international conference dedicated to the cultural astronomy of Africans
which was also the first cultural astronomy conference to include workshops and
training sessions for non-specialists. The strategies for fund raising, attracting par-
ticipants, and interacting with the international media are presented. I highlight
the achievements of this conference project and include a section on the lessons
learned. Because of the establishment of an anthropology internship class for un-
dergraduates; the workshops for undergraduates, teachers, and researchers; and the
total solar eclipse the Ghana Eclipse Conference was a unique and also success-
ful project. May our strategies serve as a blueprint for the next African cultural
astronomy conference. I next give an overview of this volume of the conference
proceedings and end with a discussion of research methods in African cultural
astronomy.

African Astronomy: Past and Present
   “. . . [H]istory in illiterate societies is not different from the pursuit of the past in literate
   ones, because it uses archaeological, linguistic, anthropological, and even (for dating pur-
   poses) astronomical evidence such as eclipses.” [53: 1]

   The term ‘cultural astronomy’ emerged from the Oxfords meetings in Archaeoas-
tronomy in the 1980s and 1990s. “Astronomies and Cultures” the title of the confer-
ence proceedings from the third Oxford conference in 1990 reflects a fundamental


Jarita C Holbrook
Bureau of Applied Research in Anthropology, University of Arizona
E-mail: holbrook@u.arizona.edu
Fax: +1-520-621-9608


J. Holbrook et al. (eds.), African Cultural Astronomy – Current Archaeoastronomy
and Ethnoastronomy Research in Africa.     C Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2008                 1
2                                                                            J. C. Holbrook




Fig. 1 Picture taken by S. Buxner of the paper on Saturday after the eclipse. Astronomy and
Culture in action in Ghana


shift in thinking about astronomy: the way that astronomy entwines in culture is not
universal and that all astronomy is culturally embedded [1]. A shift in terminology
tried to capture this by moving towards “astronomies” and “cultural astronomy” [2].
Focusing on the continent of Africa, encompassing both North Africa and South of
the Sahara, terminology needs clarification as to what is meant by “African cultural
astronomy” or “African astronomy.” Neither term is meant to imply an uniform
homogenous expression of astronomy Africa wide. Rather that with the term
“African astronomy” African is a placeholder for the African ethnic group of interest
such as Igbo astronomy, Bamana astronomy, or Sandawe astronomy or equivalently
Yoruba cultural astronomy, and so on.
    Cultural astronomy combines knowledge and methods from the fields of astron-
omy, anthropology, and history in order to study the practices and traditions of lay
experts and non-experts who relate, in the broadest sense, to the sky. The quote above
references how historians of Africa have used astronomy in their research: Eclipses are
used to aid in the dating of oral histories [3, 4, 5]. Rather than how astronomy can aid in
the study of Africa, there is the cultural astronomy study of the astronomy of Africans.
Since 1997, my research has focused on the cultural astronomy of Africa, also referred
Chasing the Shadow of the Moon                                                                 3




Fig. 2 Audra Baleisis with telescope tracking the eclipse on the University of Cape Coast campus.
Picture by S. Buxner


to as the indigenous or traditional astronomy or ethnoastronomy of Africa. After many
years as an astronomer, my interests and research shifted to studying the ways that
non-scientists view the sky, both historically and today.
    The modern study of the cultural astronomy of sub-Saharan Africa can be traced
back to an archaeoastronomical study of the Great Zimbabwe ruins at the end of the
19th century [6], which involved archaeological surveys and the determination of
alignments to celestial bodies, a method popularized by Norman Lockyer’s work on
Stonehenge and temples in Egypt [7, 8]. However, there is a large corpus of writings
in Arabic, English, French, German, and Portuguese describing various aspects of
African astronomy spanning five centuries. These sources include primary sources
such as administrative reports, Arabic documents, field notes, journal entries, trav-
elers’ notes, and secondary sources such as published articles and book chapters.
    The most well-known cultures that come to mind when African astronomy is
mentioned are the Dogon of Mali and the ancient Egyptians. The Dogon rose to
prominence due to the work of French anthropologist, Marcel Griaule [9, 10]. Us-
ing participant observation and interviews, Griaule uncovered evidence that people
in the Dogon village where he worked had knowledge of the invisible companion
4                                                                              J. C. Holbrook

Table 1 Beginning articles in african cultural astronomy
Articles                  African Ethnic Groups
Starr 1990                Bantu, Hottentots & Bushmen (Khoisan), Pygmies, Sudanese
Aveni 1993                Batammaliba, Borana, Dogon, Igbo, Khoisan, Mursi, Mbudge, Nuer,
                            Ngas, Tabwa
Warner 1996               Basutu, Chopi, Dogon, Herero, Ibibio, Igbo, Iraqw, Karanga, Khoisan,
                            Kikuyu, Lamba, Luyia, Mapela, Masai, Mursi, Naron, Nyabungu,
                            Nyasa, San, Sandawe, Sotho-Tswana, Swahili, Swazi, Tsonga,
                            Venda, Xhosa, Zande, Zulu
Doyle and Frank 1997      Borana, Dogon, Karanga (Shona)
Snedegar 2000             Ashanti, Bamana, Basutu, Batammaliba, Bemba, Borana, Dogon,
                            Hausa, Hlubi, Igbo, Khoisan, Kuba, Luba, Malagasy, Mamprusi,
                            Mbunda, Mursi, Ndembu, Nyasa, San, Shona, Somali, Sotho,
                            Swahili, Swazi, Tabwa, Tsonga, Tswana, Zulu



star to Sirius before astronomers. Griaule’s work has been the basis of many other
scholars explorations into the Dogon and their starlore [11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17],
including ancient alien visitor theorists [18]. The Egyptians have many works of
art with representations of celestial bodies and celestial Gods [19, 20, 21]. Their
pyramids have been subject to archaeoastronomy study with alignments to celestial
bodies in mind [8, 22] and, again, some authors have evoked ancient alien visi-
tors [23]. The ancient alien visitor theory, unscholarly as it is, has probably caused
the preeminence of these two cultures in popular consciousness. Yet, also has caused
the vast diversity of African cultural astronomy knowledge to be overlooked.
   A handful of historiographical articles contain a wealth of information about
various ethnic groups in Africa and their cultural astronomy. “Sub-Saharan African
Astronomical Mythology” [24]; “Africa’s Socialized Astronomy” [25]; “Traditional
Astronomical Knowledge in Africa” [26]; “Astronomy in Africa” [27]; and “Astro-
nomical Practices in Africa South of the Sahara” [16]. Table 1 shows the ethnic
groups presented in these articles. These articles are good for presenting a quick
overview of the research that has been done and that which is possible in African
cultural astronomy.
   This volume is the result of a major event meant to expand the study of African
cultural astronomy: the Ghana Eclipse Conference. The Conference was the first
meeting held in Africa focused on the astronomy traditions of Africans, the first
international cultural astronomy meeting to include workshops, and the first inter-
national science meeting to coincide with viewing a total solar eclipse. The Confer-
ence brought together scholars with active projects and those who worked on past
projects, Africans and international scholars.


The Stakeholders

What follows is a description of the stakeholders for the Ghana Eclipse conference,
their backgrounds and some of their motivations.
Chasing the Shadow of the Moon                                                      5

1) The National Society of Black Physicists – During the early planning stages of
   the Conference the National Society of Black Physicists (NSBP) took an active
   role. They specifically wanted the National Science Foundation (NSF) grants
   and other grants be submitted through their organization. The advantage of this
   strategy for the Conference was that NSBP does not charge overhead which is
   51% at the University of Arizona, my home institution; instead NSBP only in-
   cludes a support charge depending on the size and type of grant. The planning of
   this conference coincided with physics communities’ around the world plans for
   conferences honoring the 100th year of Albert Einstein’s relativity.
2) The Edward Bouchet Abdus Salaam Institute (EBASI) interest in having their
   name on the Ghana Eclipse Conference was because they had committed to hav-
   ing their Einstein meeting in Ghana but then changed to South Africa. Thus,
   they could use the Ghana Eclipse Conference to fulfill their earlier promise.
   For the conference, EBASI nor NSBP provided web page support and connec-
   tions to the physics department at the University of Cape Coast. These Black
   physics organizations see African cultural astronomy as part of their own his-
   tory but also as a great tool for teaching scientific principles to Black students
   worldwide.
3) The University of Arizona, the University of Alabama in Huntsville, and More-
   house College supported the conference financially. Morehouse College sent
   three professors and their Media Arts Department fully funded the creation and
   broadcast of an hour-long eclipse program that appeared on CNN.com. The Uni-
   versity of Arizona sent three professors and nine students subsidized by funds
   from Jane Hill’s Regents Professor Funds, the Magellan circle, the College of
   Science, and the College of Education. The University of Arizona’s College of
   Optical Sciences and Steward Observatory provided funds to subsidize the travel
   of the international speakers. The University of Arizona supported the confer-
   ence because of its connections to astronomy, culture, and solar physics, and
   because it provided students with an international educational opportunity. The
   University of Alabama in Huntsville sent one professor and two students. One
   of the students was supported by a solar physics grant held by NASA scientist
   Alphonse Stirling at NASA Marshal Spaceflight Center in Huntsville, Alabama,
   who also attended. Both NASA and the University of Alabama in Huntsville
   conducted experiments during the eclipse and used the eclipse day activities to
   encourage students to pursue careers in astronomy and solar physics.
4) Samuel Mensah is the Dean of the Faculty of Sciences at the University of Cape
   Coast. He is an optical scientist physicists trained in the USSR. His investment
   is in increasing the international reputation of the University of Cape Coast and
   fostering international scientific collaborations. He was eager to have the con-
   ference occur at the University of Cape Coast and helped tremendously with
   the local logistics and hotel negotiations. The conference and the eclipse day
   activities were an opportunity to showcase the University of Cape Coast, its pro-
   fessors, and its programs. Prof Mensah is interested in increasing interactions and
   exchanges with international students and with Optical Sciences at the University
   of Arizona. In Ghana, classes are in English and the Cape Coast campus with its
6                                                                        J. C. Holbrook

   panoramic views of the ocean is a favorite with students making future exchanges
   a strong possibility.
5) The following Nigerian professors were the major stakeholders in the confer-
   ence: Alexander Animalu, Johnson Urama, and Damina Opata. These three were
   instrumental in organizing the first conference on cultural astronomy in Africa:
   “International Conference On Ethno-Astronomy In West African Subregion.”
   That conference was to be held in Nigeria. However, the events of 9/11/2001
   resulted in a marked drop in international travel. There were simply not enough
   attendees to merit having the conference go forward. But what the announcement
   of the 2002 conference achieved was that those scholars working in African cul-
   tural astronomy became aware of one another and began corresponding regularly.
   The Nigerian committee members were instrumental in the success of the Ghana
   eclipse conference.
6) Jarita Holbrook – For me, to bring together as many of the scholars who work on
   research related to African cultural astronomy today or in the past, was critical to
   my research, my career, and for future funding. Early on, my path into studying
   the cultural astronomy of Africa began with first contacting the many reputable
   researchers working in archaeoastronomy and ethnoastronomy, including Keith
   Snedegar who focuses on the astronomy of South Africa [16, 28, 29, 30]. How-
   ever, it was not until the 2002 conference announcement that I discovered African
   scholars working in this area using a variety of methods and the current network
   of scholars emerged [31, 32].



The Conference Structure
When applying for funding, the Committee Members discovered the following: The
National Science Foundation (USA) only supports workshops that advance science
rather than conferences, the Spencer Foundation focuses on educators and peda-
gogy, and the Department of Education wants proposals to support training and
educating students. The easiest way to meet these criteria were to have three separate
workshops, thus the idea of having morning workshops was born with conference
lectures in the afternoons.
   The student workshop provided training in those background subjects and re-
search methods needed to become a leading scholar of astronomy and culture re-
search in Africa. Lecturers Kofi Maison and Oheneba Achaempong were recruited
from the University of Cape Coast, Ghana, in Geography and History with a special
focus on Africa and how these could relate to cultural astronomy research. Clive
Ruggles from Leicester University in the United Kingdom taught archaeoastronomy
methods and Thebe Medupe from University of Cape Town, South Africa, focused
on naked-eye astronomy. The final topic was cultural anthropology methods taught
by Barth Chukwuesi of the University of Nigeria, Nsukka. The students were ex-
posed to African professors who were experts in their fields and also familiar with
the cultural astronomy of Africans.
Chasing the Shadow of the Moon                                                       7

   The expert scholars who gave the afternoon conference lectures also participated
in a workshop designed to advance the field of African cultural astronomy. The
sessions that made up the workshop included considering creating a new organiza-
tion, a new journal, a new academic program, sources of funding, identifying new
UNESCO world heritage sites, and new joint projects. The results of this workshop
are presented in the achievements section of this paper.
   The goal of the K12 educators workshop was to incorporate African cultural
astronomy information into classrooms in the United States and Africa. The session
was moderated by Timothy Slater of the University of Arizona. He is an astronomy
education specialist and has extensive experience running workshops for K12 edu-
cators. The workshop brought together the teachers for the task of creating a lesson
plan using African cultural astronomy content.
   These workshops were the first of their kind for cultural astronomy conferences
and unique for scientific meetings in Africa. Many of the participants, especially the
K12 educators and the students, expressed their approval of the structure and hope
that it will be adopted for other conferences.



Pre-eclipse Activities: The Ghana Internship Class
To attract more University of Arizona students, a discussion based internship class
was created that provided three units of undergraduate or graduate credit to each
enrolled student. The goals of the class were to introduce the students to the field of
cultural astronomy, cultural astronomy research in Africa, pre-travel arrangements
for Ghana, and a final term paper (for the syllabus see the appendix). Students
could not take the class unless they were going to Ghana for the eclipse. Four
graduate students and six undergraduates participated with all except one graduate
student going to Ghana. The graduate students, besides participating in the class
and the student training sessions in Ghana, helped organize and run the K12 ed-
ucators workshop at the Conference. Combining a cultural astronomy class that
included classes in Ghana that were part of a conference was not like study abroad
programs because the time period abroad was much shorter and the classes were
specialized for this particular group of students rather than the students joining
in with normal classes. During the conference, the University of Arizona students
were joined by students from Nigeria, Ghana, the United Kingdom, and from the
University of Alabama, Huntsville, making a class of around 15 students, total. As
detailed in the next section, the University of Arizona subsidized the travel of these
students.



Strategies for Obtaining Conference Funding
Four major strategies were employed to obtain funding for the conference. (1)
The conference was focused on the astronomy and culture of Africans and encom-
8                                                                       J. C. Holbrook

passed historical archival, archaeoastronomical, and anthropological approaches to
the topic. Funding organizations supporting research in each of these disciplinary
areas were approached either by submitting full proposals or letters of inquiry: The
National Science Foundation, the Sloan Foundation, Wenner-Gren, and the Inter-
national Astronomical Union. (2) The conference had two educational aspects: the
training of students and the inclusion of K12 educators. Organizations focused on
projects in Africa, higher education in Africa and in education were approached:
the Honda Foundation, the Ghana Embassy in the United States, the Nippon Foun-
dation, the Rockefeller Foundation, the Spencer Foundation, the Sloan Foundation,
Sony Electronics, and the United States Embassies in Gabon, Ghana, Niger, Nigeria,
and South Africa. (3) The home universities of the organizers were approached as
well as local businesses that support student activities: University of Alabama in
Huntsville, University of Arizona, Morehouse College, and the Pima Federal Credit
Union. (4) The topic of the history of astronomy of Africans is part of African-
Americans’ scientific heritage and appeals were made to this community for sup-
port: Oprah’s Angels, individual businesspersons, and public appeals at the end of
radio interviews.
    The only successful funding strategies were (3) the appeals to our universities
and local businesses and (4) appeals to the African-American community. Those
organizations working in Africa said that they only focus on basic needs and the
research organizations did not feel that cultural astronomy was within their disci-
plines. One of our private African-American contributors organized and paid for
filming the entire conference which will result in a television program in the future.
The institutions which provided funds for the Conference and eclipse day activi-
ties were the University of Arizona’s Colleges of Optical Science, Education, Sci-
ence, Steward Observatory, and the Magellan’s Circle; Pima Federal Credit Union;
NASA; Morehouse College; and the University of Alabama in Huntsville.



Publicity

Attracting researchers and participants to the conference involved multiple levels
of publicity. The scholars were attracted through the various astronomy, African
studies, archaeology, anthropology, history, and cultural astronomy associations. To
attract participants, I worked with my University’s public relations officers and a
script that can be downloaded from the NOVA website [33] on how scientists can
interact more effectively with the media. I refined my message to two sound bites:
1) There is a total solar eclipse in Ghana and 2) the conference focuses on the
astronomy traditions of Africans. Keeping this focus in mind was helpful during
the radio interviews with NPR and a Cincinnati radio station. In Ghana, I shifted
to a science focus since I was co-interviewed with scientists: As Africa embraces
science and technology, they must remember that African already have and have
had science in their everyday activities and their lives and this science needs to be
highlighted.
Chasing the Shadow of the Moon                                                         9

Lessons Learned

Organizing Committee: Local and Foreign

All except for two members of the organizing committee were from outside of Ghana.
Those two in Ghana were in high demand for every event having to do with Mathe-
matics and Physics around the world. They were excellent co-organizers but busy. The
United States members were broken down into two persons focused on the eclipse, one
media person, and I was the point person and coordinated all activities related to the
conference. Even with email and cellular phones, communications could have been
better and our efforts became disjointed instead of complimentary. In fact, we ended
up with two separate eclipse day activities events one that was part of the conference
and the other that splintered off and had nothing to do with the conference. Fortunately,
the conference and our eclipse day activities kept our commitments to the University
of Cape Coast and we have plans for future endeavors and collaborations.


Attendance
We had 50 registrations for the conference mostly from the USA, Canada, and
the United Kingdom. We had originally projected 100 participants with 50 esti-
mated from Ghana. Those Africans who participated and were registered had their
registration paid either through the University of Arizona funds I had raised or
through foreign sponsorship mostly from their friends in the United States. No other
Africans that participated paid registration, thus they will not receive the conference
proceedings and did not receive the conference bag with T-shirt. Though the T-shirts
were in great demand, the $20.00 USD price was prohibitive, likewise the $100 USD
registration fee was impossible. There were consistently three primary school teach-
ers from the Cape Coast area and three UCC physics undergraduate students who
participated in the workshops and attended the afternoon and evening lectures. The
African countries represented by the attendees were Ghana, Nigeria, South Africa,
and Tanzania. There were no funds raised to subsidize the travel of African students
or participants other than experts.


Total Solar Eclipses Rock But . . .

The total solar eclipse occurred on Wednesday, March 29th, 2006, shortly after 9 am.
It was a spectacular event bringing together Africans and a dramatic and rare celes-
tial event. The last total solar eclipse occurred in Ghana in the 1940s. Some local re-
porters actually searched for people who had witnessed that eclipse and interviewed
them. In terms of the conference, nothing could be more spectacular or exciting
as a total solar eclipse. Everything after the eclipse was anticlimactic. It was very
difficult to get settled back into the routine of workshops and lectures on Thursday.
As mentioned before, the K12 Educators workshop began Thursday morning and
10                                                                      J. C. Holbrook

the workshop was designed to explore the works of the experts as potential subject
matter for lesson plans. Instead, everyone wanted to develop lesson plans about the
eclipse. The eclipse clearly eclipsed all the other research papers presented earlier
in the week.




Advice from the Wise
Raising funds for conferences is always difficult but nonetheless an endless supply
of money would have greatly alleviated many of the obstacles and setbacks associ-
ated with the conference. One way that this could have been addressed was to charge
more for the conference registration. However, to encourage African participation, I
wanted to keep the registration amount low. Considering that no Africans paid their
own registration this ended up not being the best decision.
   Particular to the fuel and transportation issues of the University of Cape Coast,
it would have been easier to hold the meetings at the Coconut Grove resort rather
than at the UCC campus. The extra cost for conference meals, two coffee breaks
with snacks, and to pay for the conference facilities would have been absorbed by
the participants through the daily hotel rates. For the Coconut Grove, the cost would
have risen to $85.00 per double up from the $65.00 a day that was paid. However,
given that the Dean of the Faculty wanted to showcase the UCC campus, the meet-
ings were held there. As there was the daily issue of the bus actually arriving in a
timely manner to transport participants, again, a large source of money would have
made it possible to switch venues to the Coconut Grove in midstream if necessary
or to charter a commercial bus for our purposes.




Achievements

New Organization and New President
Rather than start a new organization, the network of scholars working in African
cultural astronomy decided to form a loose affiliation called “The African Cultural
Astronomy Project”. The first president is Dr. Johnson Urama, a professor of As-
tronomy and Physics at the University of Nigeria, Nsukka. The goal of the project
is to meet annually to discuss achievements in the proceeding year and set goals for
the upcoming year. The conference proceedings detailed below, the raising of funds
for research, identifying sites in Africa for the UNESCO Astronomy and World Her-
itage initiative, and organizing the next meeting are among the goals for the project
in the coming year. At this time, all the project members will join the International
Society for Archaeoastronomy and Astronomy in Culture (ISAAC) and form an
Africa subgroup.
Chasing the Shadow of the Moon                                                    11

The Internship Class
It was surprisingly hard to recruit professors from the University of Cape Coast
to participate in the conference. The visit in 2005 had stimulated interest, but my
multiple emails to various faculty in the Social Sciences and Humanities over the
next year went unanswered. Upon arrival for the conference, many professors had
seen my various emails but none had responded or committed. However during the
week before the conference two excellent professors agreed to do training sessions
with the students in their areas of specialty. Special thanks go to Prof Ohenaba
Achaempong of the Geography Department and Prof Kofi Maison of the History
Department. Both reported that the students were eager and engaging and they were
glad for the experience.
    The students were drawn from many majors from physics to anthropology to
art. Thus, their comments thus far have emphasized what they have learned out-
side of their discipline and how it has enriched them intellectually. The most com-
mon statements are about how two experiences have profoundly changed their
prospective: 1) being in Ghana for the first time, and 2) viewing a total solar
eclipse.



Publications
The scholars currently running cultural astronomy projects focused on African eth-
nic groups met for three days to consider several issues including the possibility of
creating a cultural astronomy journal focused only on Africa and Africans. Those
scholars living in Africa want their own journal, however, given the limited num-
ber of active scholars and the time lag between data collection, analysis, and re-
sults, such a journal would at most be published once a year. Instead, Clive Rug-
gles and Nick Campion both suggested special editions focused on Africa of the
journals Archeoastronomy and Culture and Cosmos as alternatives. Immediately,
the conference papers are anticipated through Springer press – this volume. This
volume has two sections: Part I: the papers resulting from the student training
sessions and Part II: those papers detailing the latest research in African cultural
astronomy.
   The K12 educators workshop had the goal of producing lesson plans that in-
corporate cultural astronomy information. There were about 12 participants in the
workshop that were divided into two groups that were moderated by Timothy Slater
of the University of Arizona. The workshop design was to have the teachers discuss
what had interested them about the talks for the previous days that they thought
might be made into good lessons for their students. However, since the workshop
began the day after the eclipse they were mostly interested in doing lessons focused
on the eclipse. The two groups did pull together their ideas into two lesson plans
which will be written in standard format and placed on the internet during month
after the eclipse. This volume contains two papers about the K12 workshop in Part I:
12                                                                       J. C. Holbrook

“Integrating African Cultural Astronomy into the Classroom” by Sanlyn Buxner
and Shawna Holbrook, and “A Contemporary Approach to Teaching Eclipses” by
Timothy Slater.



Film Projects
A one hour video was produced by Morehouse College and CNN of the total so-
lar eclipse with a focus on the conference including interviews with speakers and
students. This conference broadcast is a milestone because it features not just the
sun, but includes Africans, cultural astronomy of Africa, and women experts and
students. The video can be found on the web linked to http://www.u.arizona.edu/
∼holbrook/.
   A conference DVD was financed, produced, and edited by an African Amer-
ican team lead by Earl Grant and Jerome Johnson. The project is to edit all the
videotaped talks and lectures into a multiple DVD set that will be formated for
educational use. At the time of this writing, the first DVD is completed and includes
the keynot lecture by me, Damian Opata speaking on Igbo astronomy and literature,
Clive Ruggles speaking on the Borana and Mursi calendars, and Arletha Williams-
Livingston speaking about how to incorporate Dogon cosmology into educational
outreach lessons for African American students.



A Starting Point . . .
I had the honor of being the keynote speaker at the Ghana Eclipse Conference and
it was my job to provide a starting point for the African cultural astronomy re-
searchers and students. It is important to gain an understanding of the many ways
that astronomy entwines with culture in Africa. Given the diversity of Africa, the
astronomy of individual ethnic groups is sometimes similar to that of other eth-
nic groups leading to broad categories, but the differences give rise to new but
related categories of classification. Some of the categories are explored below, de-
rived from analysis of published works. However, these simply refer to African
astronomy information that has been collected and analyzed, this is an ongoing
process.
    Classification of the cultural astronomy of Africa resources can be done in a va-
riety of ways, and the categories are subject to debate. My technique is to first clas-
sify by ethnic group, and then by the astronomy “cultural expression”. The former
preserves cultural context and promotes a deeper understanding of the many ways
that astronomy knowledge has emerged in cultural practices, rituals, and everyday
activities. The latter is useful for cross-cultural comparisons and drawing general
statements about human endeavors. A list of categories of astronomy cultural ex-
pressions is presented in Table 2.
Chasing the Shadow of the Moon                                                                  13

Table 2 Some “Cultural Expression” categories in african cultural astronomy
Sample Categories                     Description
Archaeoastronomy                       Study of alignments at archaeological sites that are not
  Alignments                             presently occupied.
Architecture                           Study of alignments of buildings and structures in
                                         occupied sites.
Astrology Divination                   Study of the documents, observations, methods, and
                                         history of people to make predictions using the
                                         positions of celestial bodies.
Astrology and Healing                  Study of the documents, observations, methods, and
                                         history of traditional healers using the positions of
                                         celestial bodies to diagnose illnesses and/or prescribe
                                         treatments.
Calendars and Timekeeping              Study of the observations, calculations, and negotiations
                                         surrounding the establishment of an accurate
                                         calendar.
Celestial and Cosmic Art               Paintings, drawing, designs, murals, and etchings
                                         representing celestial bodies, themes, legends, and
                                         cosmology.
Celestial and Cosmic                   What names are giving to celestial bodies and why.
  Names
Celestial Navigation                   The use of stars and other celestial bodies for
                                         navigation.
Dating by Celestial Bodies             Using celestial events such as comets, eclipses, and
                                         supernovae to date historical events.
Divine Priests & Cosmic                How knowledge or a perceived relationship to the night
  Kings                                  sky is used for social and political purposes.
Folklore, Myths, and                   Study of stories and tales having to do with celestial
  Legends                                beings, celestial bodies, and cosmology.
Writing, Signs, and                    Written representations of celestial bodies and
 Symbols                                cosmological concepts.



   These categories are not all-encompassing but begin the classification process
and present a starting point for understanding African cultural astronomy. The
one-sentence descriptions are meant to convey ideas about what can be studied,
but at the same time are not meant to be limiting. These topics can be explored in
many different non-African cultures as well.



Part I: Cultural Astronomy Research Lessons
The study of the cultural astronomy of Africa intersects the fields of African stud-
ies, anthropology, astronomy, and history. This volume is divided into two sections:
Part I focuses on the tools that students and beginning researchers need to learn for
doing cultural astronomy research in Africa. Much of this was taught during the
14                                                                      J. C. Holbrook

student workshop. Part II a collection of the scientific papers presented at the Ghana
Eclipse Conference. Like cultural astronomy itself, the data collection methods are
drawn from many different disciplines. The goal of the first section is to present a
foundation of data collection methods in African cultural astronomy. Part I includes
lessons in geography, astronomy, anthropology, and other topics for the beginning
student of African cultural astronomy.
   Part I begins with a detailed overview of cultural anthropology methods in ‘The
Use of Ethnographic Methods in Cultural Astronomy Research’ by Barth Chuk-
wuezi. Here I would like to add some tips useful when beginning cultural as-
tronomy research projects. Researchers should understand how to approach their
informants with both respect and patience. Depending on the skills of the re-
searcher, the informant may have a greater understanding of celestial phenomena
and motions. Thus, the researcher may benefit from training in “studying-up” [34],
a concept from anthropology and science studies used to study institutions, phys-
ical scientists, and science culture; where the people studied tend to be more
knowledgeable than the researcher. The choice of interview type depends upon
the researcher and the informant. Informal interviews comprising a few questions
can be used to assess whether a formal interview is necessary. Formal interviews
are usually recorded either through notes taken during the interview or by tape
or digital recorder, and are best for collecting detailed information with a lot of
astronomy or mathematical content. Using a translator, I find that formal inter-
views with predetermined questions are better because they are a more efficient
use of the translator’s time. Rapid assessment protocol is borrowed from applied
anthropology and archeology. A team of researchers in the field gather data us-
ing a variety of techniques during the day, either independently or in subgroups,
and each evening meet to discuss what techniques are yielding the best results.
The decided upon techniques are utilized the next research day and again a meet-
ing is held to discuss the results. After several days it becomes possible to deter-
mine the best techniques for the population, type of data, and time limitations.
The resulting techniques may differ from researcher to researcher but should be
agreed upon by the team. That is, a female researcher may have to present her
education and professional credentials in order to be taken seriously before qual-
ity data can be collected, or a local researcher may have to honor more local cus-
toms than foreign team members. Possibly, one researcher is most effective using
a survey and another with informal interviews. The goal is for the team to gather
the highest quality data possible regardless of the methods that individual team
members use.
   Field documentation techniques such as keeping daily fieldnotes, notes of inter-
views, photographs, sketches, audio tapes and video tapes are critical and borrowed
largely from anthropology. Beginning research assistants tend to write down ev-
erything in as much detail as possible, but over time learn to organize their notes
into relevant categories while writing, with information not directly related to the
research questions described at the end. Having research assistants transcribe at
least one interview before starting may allow them to pick up some interview-
ing techniques and learn how to maintain a useful flow of questions and answers.
Chasing the Shadow of the Moon                                                     15

Starting an interview with a series of questions focusing on positive things such as
education or family is useful, followed with questions that will result in a “yes”
answer. Also, when the limit of the person’s ability to answer questions is reached,
the researcher can return to something the person does know and end by asking
for more detail about that. This is a way to end the interview on a positive note.
The oral history of African astronomy can be probed by asking questions about
how their astronomy is learned, who do they think also had this knowledge, and
questions about the transmission of astronomy knowledge. Every researcher has
their own interview style and what works for one may not necessarily work for
another.
    Historical methods are necessary to understand the history of African ethnic
groups of interest to cultural astronomy scholars. Primary sources, as mentioned
previously, are the equivalent of star witnesses in terms of historical research. How-
ever, secondary sources are usually easier to locate. The identification of secondary
sources, which are then used to locate primary sources and archives is a necessary
technique borrowed from history. Using databases, catalogues, and other digitized
resources on African ethnic groups, some search terms to find useful information are
the names of individual stars, planets and constellations as well as “star,” “planet,”
and “constellation,” “sky,” “Sun,” “moon,” “weather,” variations on “celestial” and
“cosmic.” Old dictionaries can be useful for finding these terms in the local lan-
guages. The identification of researchers who have focused on particular African
ethnic groups should emerge from a study of the secondary literature. These scholars
and their students can be contacted either to interview directly or to request copies
of their original notes. A working knowledge of Africa is needed to do African
cultural astronomy research effectively. Similar to studying the night sky, a deep
study of a map of Africa focusing on the names of countries and capitols, geo-
graphic and environmental features, rainfall patterns, and population distribution is
useful, these are discussed in Basil Eze’s paper ‘A Brief Outline on the Geographical
Background of Africa’. In the field in Africa, people have a detailed knowledge
of history and events taking place in other parts of Africa and will often want to
discuss these issues with the researcher. Therefore, general knowledge of Africa is
needed to simply keep conversations going. Researchers need to identify and disre-
gard common “African” myths, such as big game animals roaming everywhere [35].
Researchers should understand that quality information can be found in urban areas
as well as rural areas because of recent migration to urban areas, and the presence
of archives, museums, and universities which often house primary source mate-
rial. The reality of Africa today rarely meets the imagined Africa, so researcher
should be prepared for the similarities to life in the United States rather than the
differences.
    Kim Malville’s archaeoastronomy exercises in ‘The Gnomon’ show the impor-
tance of the Sun’s annual motion and how to use its shadow for establishing the
cardinal directions. Archaeoastronomical measurements usually use the instruments
from archaeology to accurately measure the alignments of manmade structures such
as temples, megaliths, and graves to celestial bodies. Nothing can replace taking
a course or working closely with an archaeologist to learn the proper use of the
16                                                                        J. C. Holbrook

equipment, measuring, calculations, and mapping necessary for this research. How-
ever, laying out an accurate north/south line is a beginning. Astronomer Bradley
Schaefer has shown that it is relatively easy to find alignments to celestial bodies
at archaeological sites. However, unless there is another source that reveals that
the builders intended to build in alignments to celestial bodies, alignments alone are
inconclusive [36]. He goes on to suggest that the analysis of multiple related sites all
showing the same alignments makes a stronger case for intentionality in the absence
of written sources or ethnographic evidence. Other issues that may be of concern to
researchers are how the brightness of the night sky changes with the phases of the
moon and thus which stars are visible during a particular phase; and on what date
is a certain star visible just before sunrise (helical rising). Schaefer addresses these
and provides computer programs to calculate accurate values [36, 37, 38, 39, 40].
In the absence of archaeological equipment to measure alignments, a researcher can
strategically be present to take photographs to document alignments. For example,
the Batammaliba of Togo align the front door of their houses to the midwinter sun-
set [41]. A photograph from inside one of their houses on December 21st would
provide irrefutable evidence of the alignment.
    The “Naked Eye Astronomy for Cultural Astronomers” lesson outlines those
celestial bodies that a cultural astronomy researcher should be familiar with. Star
chart, planispheres, and astronomy software are the tools for identifying and verify-
ing celestial information uncovered in the literature and gathered during fieldwork.
Chukwuesi’s lesson on ethnography cover much of what is needed for fieldwork, but
this chapter suggests what to ask, beginning with developing a common language
about the sky. But also suggests common areas of inquiry such as gender issues and
the transmission of knowledge.
    Shawna Holbrook’s paper, ‘Leadership’, is a report on the student workshop fo-
cused on both how to be a team leader and how to become a leader in an academic
field. The students were encouraged to brainstorm about various qualities a good
leader and to name their favorite leaders. The issue of good leadership arose again
around the issue of good mentors. In addition, they brainstormed about actions they
could take to become leaders in any academic discipline. With the findings presented
in this report new researchers can begin to think through what leadership means in
their lives.
    The next two papers are about K12 education and cultural astronomy content.
The first “Integrating African Cultural Astronomy” by Sanlyn Buxner and Shawna
Holbrook reports on the K12 teachers workshop that took place March 30–31, 2006,
after the total solar eclipse. Not surprisingly, the teachers decided that lessons about
the total solar eclipse were needed. “Contemporary Approach to Teaching Eclipses”
by Timothy Slater is an astronomy education paper providing research, results, and
suggestions for teaching about eclipses.
    “Teaching Cultural Astronomy: On the Development and Evolution of the Syl-
labus at Bath Spa University” by Nicholas Campion end Part I. Campion provides
a detailed description of the Masters of Arts program in Cultural Astronomy and
Astrology currently at Bath Spa University in the United Kingdom. His paper is a
blueprint for designing graduate programs in cultural astronomy.
Chasing the Shadow of the Moon                                                     17

Part II: Current Research in African Cultural Astronomy
Part II focuses on the latest cultural astronomy research taking place in Africa. The
current research includes ethnoastronomy, archaeoastronomy, and analysis of rock
art. It is the last which starts this section: a paper by Felix Chami, “Evidence of
Ancient African Beliefs in Celestial Bodies.” Chami analyses some of the celestial
icons found at many rock art sites in Tanzania. J. McKim Malvilles paper, “Astron-
omy of Nabta Playa” takes us to the Sahara desert in southern Egypt where a stone
circle calender has been discovered as well as an ancient nomadic culture that fol-
lowed the seasonal rains. “Romans, Astronomy and the Qibla” by Michael Bonine
looks at the alignment of mosques in Tunisia. His research answers the questions of
why the mosques are aligned to the winter solstice sunrise, but begs the question of
why the Romans aligned their cities to the winter solstice sunrise.
    After the television program “Wonders of the African World” [42, 43], scholars
around the world renewed their efforts to preserve the libraries of Mali written in
Arabic. R. Thebe Medupe is one of the South African team of scholars leading
efforts to find and analyze manuscripts related to science in general and astronomy
in particular. His paper “The Timbuktu Astronomy Project” includes the translation
of some of the manuscipts and a discussion of the astronomy found in it.
    The next two papers look at the cosmology of the Igbo and the Yoruba-Idààcha in
West Africa. Aimé Sègla examines the links between cosmology, sacred numbers,
and calendars in his paper “The Cosmological Vision Of The Yoruba-Idààcha Of
Benin Republic (West Africa): A Light On Yoruba History And Culture.” Barth
Chukwuezi introduces Igbo cosmology, the celestial deities, and weatherlore in his
paper “The Relationship between Human Destiny and The Cosmic Forces – A Study
of the Igbo Worldview.” Both papers touch on divination and prediction.
    Damian Opata presents a literary analysis of celestial themes in African writings.
His paper uniquely explores novels, poems, and folkloric saying from throughout
Africa. It provides a great example of the interdisciplinary nature of cultural as-
tronomy research crossing into the humanities, but also the how celestial themes
sometimes entwine with political and colonial realities.
    The last two papers bring astronomers into the cultural astronomy milieu. John-
son Urama touches on the history of astronomy and ethnoastronomy in his pa-
per “Astronomy and Culture in Nigeria.” Hakeem Oluseyi and Johnson Urama
provide a history of astronomers of African Descent in “Participation and Research
of Astronomers and Astrophysicists of Black African Descent (1900–2005).” Cul-
tural Astronomy researchers internationally include a large number of astronomers,
so not surprisingly many African cultural astronomy researchers are both of African
descent and trained as astronomers including Hakeem Oluseyi, Johnson Urama,
Thebe Medupe, and me.
    This volume includes research projects from North, West, and East Africa; and
spanning ancient Africa to the present. It shows cultural astronomy to be a unifying
yet interdisciplinary concept useful for the examination of Africans and their skies,
past and present. This volume is also the result of the first meeting of African cul-
tural astronomy researchers and students who gathered for the March 29, 2006, total
18                                                                                 J. C. Holbrook

solar eclipse. The connection between the cultural astronomy researchers and this
celestial event was strong and obvious. Currently, the African Cultural Astronomy
Project is tentatively planning the next meeting around the 2010 annular eclipse
visible in East Africa.


References
 1. Ruggles, C.L.N., The Study of Cultural Astronomy, in Astronomies and Cultures,
    C.L.N. Ruggles and N.J. Saunders, Editors. 1993, Niwot, CO: University Press of Colorado.
    pp. 1–31.
 2. Campion, N., Editorial. Culture and Cosmos. A Journal of the History of Astrology and Cul-
    tural Astronomy, 1997. 1(1): pp. 1–2.
 3. Henige, D., ”Day was of Sudden Turned into Night”: On the Use of Eclipses for Dating Oral
    History. Comparative Studies in Society and History, 1976. 18(4): pp. 476–501.
 4. Gray, R., Eclipse Maps. Journal of African History, 1965. 6(3): pp. 251–262.
 5. Gray, R., Annular Eclipse Maps. Journal of African History, 1968. 9(1): pp. 147–157.
 6. Bent, J.T. and R.M.W. Swan, On the Orientation and Measurements of Zimbabwe Ruins, in
    The ruined cities of Mashonaland; being a record of excavation and exploration in 1891. 1893,
    Longmans, Green and co.: London. pp. xi, 376.
 7. Lockyer, N., Stonehenge and other British stone monuments astronomically considered. 1906,
    London,: Macmillan and co., limited. pp. xii, 340.
 8. Lockyer, N., The Dawn of Astronomy. 1894, New York and London: Macmillan and co. pp.
    xvi, 432.
 9. Griaule, M. and G. Dieterlen, Le renard pãale. 1965, Paris: Institut d’ethnologie.
10. Griaule, M., Conversation with Ogotemmãeli. 1965, London: Published for the International
    African Institute by the Oxford University Press. pp. xvii, 230.
11. Roxburgh, I.W. and I.P. Williams, The Dogon tribe and Sirius. The Observatory, 1975. 95:
    pp. 215–215.
12. Pesch, P.R., The Dogon and Sirius. The Observatory, 1977. 97: pp. 26–28.
13. Brecher, K., Sirius Enigmas. Technology Review, 1977: pp. 80 (2):52–63.
14. Williams-Livingston, A.D., Po Tolo: The Convergence of Science and Culture among the
    Dogon, in DAI. 1998. pp. 138.
15. Hunter, H., African Observers of the Universe: The Sirius Question, in Blacks in Science:
    Ancient and Modern, I. Van Sertima, Editor. 1983, New Brunswick, N.J.: Transaction Books.
16. Snedegar, K., Astronomical Practices in Africa South of the Sahara, in Astronomy across cul-
    tures : the history of non-Western astronomy. 2000, Kluwer Academic Publishers: Dordrecht;
    Boston. pp. 455–473.
17. van Beek, W.E.A., Dogon Restudied: A Field Evaluation of the Work of Marcel Griaule. Cur-
    rent anthropology, 1991. 32(2): p. 139–166.
18. Temple, R.K.G., The Sirius mystery : new scientific evidence of alien contact 5,000 years ago.
    1st U.S. ed. 1998, Rochester, Vt.: Destiny Books. viii, pp. 440.
19. Hardy, P., The Cairo Calendar as a Stellar Almanac. Archaeoastronomy, 2003. XVII:
    pp. 48–63.
20. Wallin, P.H., Celestial cycles: Astronomical concepts of regeneration in the ancient Egyptian
    Coffin Texts, in DAI. 2002. p. 196.
21. Belmonte, J.A., On the Orientation of Old Kingdom Egyptian Pyramids. Archaeoastronomy
    Supplement, 2001. 32: p. 1.
22. Krupp, E.C., In search of ancient astronomies. 1st McGraw-Hill paperback ed. 1978, New
    York: McGraw-Hill. pp. xvii, 300.
23. Dèaniken, E.v., Chariots of the gods? Unsolved mysteries of the past. 1969, London: Souvenir.
    189 p., 20 plates.
Chasing the Shadow of the Moon                                                                  19

24. Starr, E.M., Sub-Saharan African Astronomical Mythology. The Planetarian, 1990. 19(3):
    pp. 8–18.
25. Aveni, A., Africa’s Socialized Astronomy, in Ancient Astronomers, A. Aveni, Editor. 1993,
    St. Remy Press: Montreal. pp. 90–99.
26. Warner, B., Traditional Astronomical Knowledge in Africa, in Astronomy before the Telescope,
    C. Waller, Editor. 1996, British Museum Press: London.
27. Doyle, L. and E. Frank, Astronomy in Africa, in Encyclopaedia of the history of science,
    technology, and medicine in non-western cultures, H. Selin, Editor. 1997, Kluwer Academic:
    Dordrecht; Boston. pp. 554–557.
28. Snedegar, K., ”Ikhwezi”. Mercury, 1997: p. 13.
29. Snedegar, K., First Fruits Celebrations among the Nguni Peoples of Southern Africa: An Eth-
    noastronomical Interpretation. Archaeoastronomy, 1998. 23: pp. S31–S38.
30. Snedegar, K., Sub-Saharan Africa: Cultural Astronomy’s Heart of Darkness. Archaeoastron-
    omy & Ethnoastronomy Newsletter, 1999(32): p. 1.
31. Dunn, K., Equality is in the stars for South Africans, in Christian Science Monitor. 2000:
    Boston. p. 1.
32. Medupe, R. and L. Kaunda, The problems of science in Africa. Mercury, 1997. 26(6):
    pp. 16–19.
33. Funsten, H.O., You and the Media: A researcher’s Guide for dealing successfully with the
    news media. 2000, American Geophysical Union: Washington, D.C.
34. Nadar, L., Up the Anthropologist - Perspectives Gained from Studying Up, in Reinventing
    anthropology, D.H. Hymes, Editor. 1972, Pantheon Books: New York,. pp. vi, 470.
35. Keim, C.A., Mistaking Africa : curiosities and inventions of the American mind. 1999, Boul-
    der: Westview Press. pp. xiii, 196.
36. Schaefer, B.E., New Methods and Techniques for Historical Astronomy and Archaeoastron-
    omy. Archaeoastronomy, 2000. XV: pp. 121–136.
37. Schaefer, B.E., Celestial Visibility for Astronomy History. Bulletin of the American Astronom-
    ical Society, 1998. 193: p. 1283.
38. Schaefer, B.E., Lunar Crescent Visibility. Quarterly Journal of the Royal Astronomical Society,
    1996. 37: p. 759.
39. Schaefer, B.E., A Comprehensive Set of Equations for Celestial Visibility Calculations. Bul-
    letin of the American Astronomical Society, 1993. 183: p. 1335.
40. Schaefer, B.E., Astronomy and the limits of vision. Vistas in Astronomy, 1993. 36:
    pp. 311–361.
41. Blier, S.P., The Anatomy of Architecture: Ontology and Metaphor in Batammaliba Architec-
    tural Expression. 1987, New York: Cambridge University Press.
42. Gates, H.L., Wonders of the African world. 1st ed. 1999, New York: Knopf : Distributed by
    Random House. pp. x, 275.
43. Gates, H.L., et al., Wonders of the African world. 1999, Distributed by PBS Home Video,:
    [Alexandria, Va.].
The Use of Ethnographic Methods in Cultural
Astronomy Research

Barth Chukwuezi




Introduction
The issue of ontology of knowledge and the epistemology of arriving at the truth
of knowledge has generated various strands of opinions which tend to favour
positivism or empiricism. Social science wants to belong to the school of pos-
itivism or empiricism rather than subjectivism and as such has outlined some
measure of scientific methods for its epistemological investigation. Some disci-
plines in social sciences tend to be more quantitative than others in their ap-
proach, especially economics and psychology. However, one can posit that the
level of scientific investigation in natural sciences tend to be more concrete and
experimental than that of social sciences possibly because of different objects of
investigation.
    The paper will attempt to discuss the concept of qualitative method in ethno-
graphic study which could be used for the study of Cultural Astronomy and the var-
ious arguments for and against qualitative method. The need for qualitative method
will also be discussed including the various Ethnographic Research methods and
how they are used in field research. Finally, there will be the conclusion.


Concept of Ethnographic Method

Qualitative method has become one of the empirical methods in the social sciences.
Qualitative method of research and analysis is a major instrument for gathering
data on cultural anthropological studies. It does not seem to engross itself with
much quantitative complex data that some social scientists use for data analysis
(Koltak, 1991).
   The qualitative method which is ethnographic technique is what the Anthropol-
ogists use to study simple societies, personal relationship and fairly homogenous
societies. Ethnographic method is seen as a means of research investigation using


Barth Chukwuezi
Association of Professor, Department Of Sociology/Anthropology, University Of Nigeria, Nsukka


J. Holbrook et al. (eds.), African Cultural Astronomy – Current Archaeoastronomy
and Ethnoastronomy Research in Africa.     C Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2008   21
22                                                                        B. Chukwuezi

unstructured questions, in-depth interview, observation and employing verbal de-
scriptions and explanations (Nwanunobi, 2002). Ethnographic research method is
quite useful in areas where the nature and character of social life are vital for the
analysis of all phenomenon especially at small scale and local levels. It is also good
in areas where there is the need to understand various aspects and strands of social
activities and cultural configurations.
   Ethnographic methods have been criticized by some scholars (such as Borman,
LeCompt and Goetz, 1980), as being unreliable, lacking measurements and pre-
dictability. In the same vein Krent and Sax (1980) have replied to the critics,
saying that Quantitative Method has little correspondence between measure and
reality and that such research has produced little “truth”. They equally criticized
the sloppy use of statistics and the problem inherent in lack of understanding
causality.
   These arguments have encouraged some Anthropologists to evolve a combina-
tion of the qualitative and quantitative approach in their research (Bernard, 1988;
Fielding and Fielding, 1987; Pelto and Pelto, 1979). It is necessary to add that even
those engrossed in quantitative method in social sciences are also turning to the
ethnographic tools of field work and personal interview as relevant tools for their
study.


Ethnographic Methods
In this segment of the paper, the various ethnographic methods that Anthropologists
use in their research will be discussed especially as it relates to Cultural Astron-
omy. This will take into cognizance some of the new grounds in the areas which
tend to make Ethnographic Research more reliable and scientific (Johnson, 1990;
Bernard, 1988).

Observation/Participant Observation
One of the major tools of ethnographic research is observation. It has two types –
participant observation and non-participant observation. Observation entails that the
researcher has to enmesh himself or herself in the society of the studied people
and observe every detail of their various activities which form the object of the
research. Participant observation involves the situation where the researcher takes up
an appropriate status with the research population. According to Nwanunobi (2002:
41), the “researcher sees through the eyes of a member of the community rather than
as an outsider”. The researcher takes part in various cultural activities of the people
and notes their feelings and reactions to various issues that concern his research. The
researcher is expected to master the language of the people and establish intimate
ties with the people.
    He/She has to report the activities the way it is and should not be guided by
value judgments. The researcher has to understand the various idioms and symbolic
expressions of the community under study. However, there is a limit to the extent one
Use of Ethnographic Methods in Cultural Astronomy Research                          23

can observe, especially in activities involving secret cults which require researchers
not to divulge information. It is also difficult in robbery gangs. A man cannot fit
properly in an exclusive women group neither can a woman fit into exclusive male
secret cult organizations. At times some researchers could go to extra lengths and
Nwanunobi (2002) pointed out a white researcher who painted himself black so
as to research on a black group in the United States in the course of participant
observation research. There have been opinions expressed by some people that it
is quite difficult for an outsider to totally get enmeshed in another persons’ culture.
There are various constraints including the language and symbolic expressive modes
of communications which an outsider may not properly decode. At times, the re-
searcher may be deceived by the cultural members into having false interpretations
of some cultural actions.



Observations
There is observation which you may not be a participant. You may not participate
directly in the people’s cultural activities, rather, you can be an observer. And like
participant observation knowledge of people’s culture is also important such as the
mode of communication in the systems, language, the signs and symbols. The more
you know this, the better it is for you to depict the culture configuration within the
society. And as you observe you are going to decode the culture based on the fact
that you have known the culture to some extent so that you can begin to decode
the observations you are making. And in fact it’s a major tool in anthropological
study. Anthropologists go to the community, stay with the community, learn the
aspects of the culture, and begin to decode what the people do. In most of the
major anthropologist work, observation is involved. You may not necessarily be
a participant, but you have to be a keen observer. There is a problem here in the
sense that at times you might observe wrongly. There might be wrong observations
because if you are not very much in tune with the cultural information when the
people might be gazing at the stars you may think they are gazing at the moon or
when they are talking about the moon you may think they are talking about the stars.
You have to be very friendly, very open to the people so they can accept you as part
of them even though it is very difficult. So there is that element of good rapport
with community members for them to divulge some of the sensitive information to
you. For example the art of rain making which also includes watching the stars is
very secretive. People within the rain making tradition do not allow others to learn
because many of their livelihoods depend on this institution. They get money out
of this so if they divulge the information to you it means their trade may become
extinct.
    Observation also has another limitation. It is what they call cultural bias. You
may observe a certain particular culture activity but because of your own cultural
background, you begin to make value judgments on the cultural practices. You have
to report it the way the people say they do it, rather than have your own cultural
influences impinge on your study.
24                                                                         B. Chukwuezi

Selection of Ethnographic Informants
According to Blum et al. (1997) who developed Ethnographic Protocol of Food
Assessment for the International Union of Nutritional Sciences, the selection of in-
formants is the most important aspect of ethnographic research. In addition, notable
Anthropologists such as Mead (1955) and Johnson (1990) have argued that selection
of informants form the major base of ethnographic study. A good selected sample
of informants will help in the reliability of data being collected. The selection of in-
formants is related to the choice of inquiry. In some small scale homogenous group
where there is focused Ethnographic Study, Key Informants and other informants
are quite necessary.
   According to Tretsby quoted in Johnson (1990: 24) “when we use Key Informants
we are not randomly sampling from the universe of characteristics under study.
Rather we are selecting specialized knowledgeable characteristics”. Key Informants
are selected based on purposive sampling of the best knowledgeable people in the
object of inquiry within the population of study. The researcher is compelled to
check out the entire study population for such people.
   In addition, there is also the selection of informants purposively from the research
population by a form of cross selection. This should reflect the various groups within
the population. It could be through stratified, cluster and systematic random sam-
pling to get a representative sample of the studied group.
   In ethnographic research, Key Informants guide the terrain of the cultural do-
main and there should be much interaction between the Key Informants and the
researcher. Selection of Key Informants and informants is based on the researcher’s
theoretically and experientially informed judgment based on the issue of research
focus. In a study carried out by Chukwuezi (1998) for UNICEF on Focused Ethno-
graphic Study of Acute Respiratory Infectious (ARI) illness of children under five,
in Imo and Kano States of Nigeria, a variety of informants were chosen based on
the thematic issue. Key Informants were chosen based on knowledge of Acute
Respiratory Infectious (ARI). Other informants were mothers of children with
current ARI, mothers of children who had past ARI episode, traditional healers,
drug sellers and health clinics staff. The idea is to get a target group which cuts
across the community being studied. It is a kind of cross sectional selection of Key
Informants.


Data Driven Selection
According to Johnson (1990) the first round of informant selection discussed above
could be theory driven and he also explained that one can also select informants
based on data. This is also part of the effort to ensure greater reliability and could be
quantitatively tested for reliability. Johnson (1990) described how informants were
selected based on social networks of those in close contact in a study of a fish-
ing village in North Carolina, USA. The informants were subjected to pile sorting
technique and multi-dimensional scaling which reveals the closeness of people to
one another. Those with close networks were selected for the study. The selected
Use of Ethnographic Methods in Cultural Astronomy Research                          25

informants were quite knowledgeable in the social structure and social relationships
in the village. The study was on diffusion of technological innovation in the village.
At the end of the study it was tested for reliability and it was quite encouraging.

In-depth Interview
This is a process designed to elicit more information on a research topic. In Ethno-
graphic research involving cultural astronomy, in-depth interview and at times
intimate interview is used and that is part of the reason for choosing Key Infor-
mants. Key Informants are better disposed for in-depth interview since they are quite
knowledgeable in the focus of the research.
    In-depth interview yields more information than a general survey which picks
respondents or informants at random. It is quite necessary in various forms of re-
searches and it is better addressed when the researcher builds intimate relationships
with the Key Informants. This form of interview requires more probing and prompt-
ing and more exhaustive cross questioning than general interview. It tries to confirm
or validate or even question what has been gathered in general interview. It tends to
give further clarification on issues addressed about the research.

Case Studies/Case Histories
Case studies refer to a specific study of a particular case as opposed to a general
study. For example, one can undertake a specific study within a larger area which
represents a smaller area within the larger area studies. Case studies could also refer
to a particular study within a larger area of study. For example, one can decide to
make a case study of marriage in a particular village as opposed to the entire social
cultural activities of the community. Case studies could also refer to specific case
studies of social institutions within a study area. When you come to a community
there are certain activities that take place but you may choose to study a particular
activity out of so many and you call it a case study. For example in a community we
have an economic system, the political system, the kinship system, various social
organizations systems, and you choose a particular one, say the marriage system to
study in detail out of so many different systems. But then a case study can change
depending on your view. For example in watching the stars there are various things
that inform cultural astronomy. You might say it is the stars, the moon, the earth, the
solar system, whatever, and then you might pick a particular issue as a case study
and you want to study all that is involved in that particular aspect.

Projective or Scenario Method
This is also a part of ethnographic study in which a future scenario is created in
order to know how it could be analyzed or discussed. For example, there could be
hypothetical cases to know if informants are able to recognize certain illness signs
and symptoms afflicting their children. It could also be a scenario of presenting
confederate hypothetical cases to Drug Stores or Pharmacists to know if they can
26                                                                         B. Chukwuezi

proffer treatment regime for a particular illness being studied. This form of method
was used in a focused Ethnographic Study I did for UNICEF in order to ascertain
how drug vendors responded to treatment of ARI in Owerrri and Kano states of
Nigeria, as mentioned earlier. This form of method could be used to gather informa-
tion on cultural astronomy. For example, one can present a picture of the eclipse and
ask people what they thought of it. You could also present a picture of the various
movements in the sky and ask the people what they can interpret from that. It could
be hypothetical configuration where various situations that are relevant to a research
study are examined to know the peoples reactions to them.

Longitudinal Study
Longitudinal study is also used by Anthropologists to reflect on earlier studies. It
takes a historical account of changes from the past to present. Some Anthropologists
carry out longitudinal studies of an area right from the earlier study to the present to
notice how changes have impacted on the community.
   For example, Koltak (1991) has continued to make a progressive study of the
Arembpi people of Brazil right from an early visit in the 50s to the 90s in order
to study the impact of social change in that small Brazilian community. Cultural
Astronomy studies could reflect on what people thought about the cosmic, forces
in the past and present to understand the form of changes and perception affecting
cultural astronomy among the communities.

Free Listing Method
This involves the system of listing required items in a cultural domain to find out cer-
tain required things. It is another form of carrying out a simple qualitative research.
This idea is used to find out certain things within a cultural domain. It could also be
used to support certain observed things within the same culture area. If more listing
of items are required, the number of respondents could also increase depending on
what the researcher wants.
   Free listing is becoming a popular tool for anthropologists trying to catego-
rize or elicit information on various items in a cultural domain. Romney and
D’Andraide (1964) have recommended the approach and Weller (1984) has used
such for disease concepts. In Cultural Astronomy, free listing could be used to col-
lect information about the sun, moon, stars, etc., by asking people to list what they
think about any category of them. At the end of the listing the likely correct answers
are usually the ones with the highest frequency of mentions among the respondents.


Pile Sorts Technique
This is formal interview gathering when study items have been selected. Pile sort is
a form of trying to sort out certain things within a given cultural domain by various
individuals as a way of identifying their properties, similarities, etc. In pile sort
tasks, individuals are given certain designed categories to sort out according to their
Use of Ethnographic Methods in Cultural Astronomy Research                            27

choice. Pile sorts could be used to collect data on social relations among people.
Some Anthropologists have used pile sorts technique to collect information on a
variety of things such as relevant behaviors on a number of diverse cultural patterns
(Weller and Romney, 1990).
   To use the pile sort, the items to be studied are usually presented in cards. Words
could be written on cards for those that are literate. Visual stimuli could be presented
to non-literate respondents. The cards are shuffled or randomized for the respon-
dents to make their sorting into piles so that similar items are on a pile together.
They may be asked to make a specific number or as much as they want. Allow the
informants to finish their sorting before asking questions to avoid bias.
   Descriptive answers could be used in interpreting final results. Weller and Rom-
ney (1990: 22–23) gave example of how simple pile sort could be represented graph-
ically. Assuming we collected data on similarity of seven items and respondents put
items A, B, C together in 1 pile; D and E in a pile and left F and G by themselves –
we can create a table to tabulate similarity among the items.
   Cultural astronomy could use pile sorts to known similarities or relatedness
among the various cosmic representations and activities within the community when
properly coordinated. The various matrices for the respondents who did the sorting
could be drawn and given the relevant description. The advantage of pile sorts is
that large items could be sorted out on the bases of similarity or dissimilarity.

Ranking
Ranking is similar to rating but again it depends on what one is studying and the
research focus. In Ethnographic Studies ranking could be used to test the popularity
of certain items. For example, one could use ranking to establish health institutions
that offer better services than others do. In cultural astronomy one could use the
ranking method to know the levels of esteem and recognition of the various cos-
mic forces. You could use it to know the degree of respect and reverence attached
to various celestial bodies including the levels of high-ranking categories assigned
to them.


Documentary Records
Documentary records are quite relevant in cultural astronomy studies. Documentary
records are used to search for written materials on a research focus. It involves
looking at the archives, public records, official government records and personal
documented records. It is part of secondary data collection. It could reinforce what
is already gathered in the field during investigation. It could also serve as a basis for
further investigation and better data analysis on the research topic.
    At times the documents are readily provided for researchers and at times the
classified documents are not easily accessible. Public documents could be in the
form of published books, magazines and journals, newspapers and at times statistical
reports – annual and census records.
28                                                                                 B. Chukwuezi

    Personal documents include the papers concerning personal memoirs, personal
records which is in private custody. In some cases, people’s life histories or profiles
are made out of personal documents. It is also important to note that there could be
oral/symbolic documents. Some communities do not know how to read and write.
However, they may document events either orally or by symbolic signs. Issues like
the periods of eclipse, bizarre climatic changes may be recorded orally, symbolically
or by artistic display, for example in some communities the passages of events are
known with signs. They tell you when this happened there was a sign to denote it. It
is documented but not in written form. We can begin to look at it and see why it is
in this form and we get information for it.


Conclusion
The various forms of ethnographic methods have been discussed as it relates to cul-
tural astronomy studies and each of them has its advantages and problems. However,
the various methods represent the various ways anthropologists carry out ethno-
graphic researches, which could be fairly reliable. Depending on the nature of the
research, these methods could be all used together or some could be combined in
order to get reliable data. Besides, the essence of combing these methods is to ensure
rigorous pursuit of reliable data, which could be validated. In many anthropological
studies which are much of applied anthropology, anthropologists use these various
methods to get at the objectives of their research – cultural astronomy research
could benefit immensely when they use some of the methods outlined which are
also ethnographic methods.


References
Alemika, E. (2002): “Epistemological Foundations of Scientific Method” in Erinosho, L., Obasi, I.,
   Maduekwe, A. (eds.) Interdisciplinary Methodologies In the Social Sciences. Abuja. UNESCO:
   1–35.
Bernard, R. (1988): Research Methods in Cultural Anthropology. Newbury Park CA,
   Sage Publishers.
Blum, L., Pelto, J; Pelto; Kulkin, H. (1997): Assessment of Natural Food Sources of Vitamin A –
   Guidelines for Ethnographic Protocol. Canada – Centre for Nutrition and the Environment of
   Indigenous Peoples (CINE), MC. Gill University.
Chukwuezi, B. (1997): “The Use of Computer in Data Analysis” in V/I Mood (ed). High points
   in Development. Uyo. University Press.
Chukwuezi, B. (1998): “Focused Ethnographic Study of 5 Childhood Illnesses in Owerri and Kano
   States of Nigeria, Volume I and II”. Report submitted to The UNICEF, Nigeria.
Fielding, N., Fielding, J (1987): Linking Date. Newbury Park CA, Sage Publishers.
Johnson J. (1990): Selecting Ethnographic Informants. Newbury Park CA, Sage Publishers.
Koltak, K. (1991): Anthropology. Canada. MC. Gill University.
Nwanunobi, C. (2002): “The Scientific Method II. Qualitative Methodology”. In Erinosho, L.;
   Obasi, I.; Maduekwe, A. (eds.) Interdisciplinary Methodologies in the Social Sciences. Abuja.
   UNESCO, Nigeria.
Obikeze, D. S. (1990): Methods of Data Analysis in the Social and Behavioural Sciences. Enugu.
   Auto Century Publishing Co. Ltd.
A Brief Outline on the Geographical
Background of Africa

Basil U. Eze




Introduction
This write-up makes an attempt at presenting a basic outline on some of the physical
and human features with which to identify the continent of Africa. Even in a study
such as African Cultural Astronomy a researcher needs to know about Africa. This
is strictly a basic outline but promises to be an interesting reading.



Physical Features

Size, Shape and Position
Africa, with an area of about 31 million square kilometres (including the Islands), is the
second largest continent in the world, second only to Asia. Africa is about three times
the area of Europe; and Canada and U.S.A combined represent only about three-fifths
of the total area of Africa. It contains about one-fourth of all the land in the world.
    As regards shape, compactness is the principal character of Africa. The continent
is much more compact than Europe, for example, the coastline is relatively straight
with very few indentations (in the form of capes, bays etc). The continental shelf of
Africa is also very short. In the same way on the land, one finds sudden rises to high
elevations within a short distance. Again, Europe is sometimes, called “Peninsula
of Peninsulas.” In the case of Africa, the sole prolongation of the coast is the So-
maliland Peninsula. Large tracts of Africa lie far distant from the ocean, and in the
northern part of the continent; for example, much of the interior lies about 1,200 km
from the seaboard.
    Africa lies between the Atlantic and Indian oceans and is positioned antipodal
to the Pacific ocean and lacks pacific coastline. Africa lies astride the equator and


Basil U. Eze
Department of Geography and Meteorology, Enugu State, University of Science and Technology,
Enugu, Nigeria


J. Holbrook et al. (eds.), African Cultural Astronomy – Current Archaeoastronomy
and Ethnoastronomy Research in Africa.     C Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2008   29
30                                                                          B. U. Eze

extends from about latitude 37◦ N to nearly 35◦ S almost equal distances north and
south of the equator. It stretches for a distance of about 8000 km north to south,
from Bizerte in Tunis down to Cape Agulhas in South Africa along longitude 20◦ E.
It is almost equal distance across, stretching for a distance of about 7000 km along
latitude 10◦ N, from its most westerly point – Cape Verde (17◦ W) in Darkar – to the
most easterly point – Cape Ras Hafun (near Cape Guardafui) which lies at about
511/2◦ E (see Fig. 1).
    From the foregoing, it is obvious that the equator passes almost through the mid-
dle of the continent and in this respect, Africa is unique amongst the great land
masses of the world. It is the most tropical of all the continents as three-quarters
of the continent or over 24 million square kilometres lie within the tropics. The
disparity in the area of Africa north of the equator and Africa South of this line is
worthy of note. That part of the continent north of the equator is more than double
the area of that division of Africa lying south of equator.




Fig. 1 Map of Africa (location).
Source: Abegunde et al. (1990)
Geographical Background of Africa                                                    31

The Relief of Africa
Africa, as a whole consists of a series of rigid plateau surfaces, consisting of ancient
rocks; it is generally level and monotonous over vast areas with a narrow coastal
plain. The plateaus are higher in the south and east than in the north and west. Thus
in respect of this apparent uniformity, there may be distinguished, what has been
termed a “High” and a “low” Africa divided by a line drawn from northern Angola,
north-eastwards to western Ethiopia around the gulf of Aden. Thus low Africa lies
in north and west, while High Africa lies in the south and east (Fig. 2).




Fig. 2 Africa: main physical features.
Source: Abegunde (1990)
32                                                                           B. U. Eze

   Low Africa is largely made up of upland plains and sedimentary basins from 500
to 2000 ft above sea level, that is from 150–600 metres above sea level. In low Africa
there are exceptional ridges or plateaus standing above the general level of the major
tableland; among those in the north are found mainly in parts of atlas mountains, the
granitic uplands of Dar Fur, Ennedi, Borku, Tasili, Tibesti, Tummo and Ahaggar. In
West Africa are the Fouta Djallon and Guinea highlands which are usually less than
900 meters high. To the south and east, High Africa is nearly all above 3000 ft or 900
metres. The exceptions are Somalia which is low lying, the lowlands on either side of
Mozambique channel, the narrow coastal plains and valleys along some of the rivers
like the River Zambezi, Orange river etc. Even the Kalahari Basin is 3000 ft or more
above Mean sea level. The highest point in south Africa is the Drankensberg (Dragon
mountain) which is over 3000 m high. In general, the surface of Africa is dominated
by great plateaus several thousand feet above mean sea level. The Plateaus are the
products of long periods of erosion, uninterrupted by folding and consequently, the
whole Block of Africa has been uplifted, but the uplift has been highest in the south
and east where most of the areas lie above 3000 ft above mean sea level.
   There are some places in Africa which are not part of the plateaus. Among them
are the two fold mountain belts; the atlas mountain belt in the north and the cape
ranges in the south; also there are the few volcanic cones which have accumulated
on the surface of the plateaus building peaks which is above the general level of
plateaus. Examples of these are the Cameroun peak (4070 m), the Ethiopian high-
lands (over 3,500 m), the Elgon (4321 m), Kenyan highland lands (over 3,500 m),
and Kilimanjaro (5898 m), which is the highest peak in Africa. Others include Aha-
gar and Tibesti mountains.
   Apart from the mountains, there are six major basins in Africa; these basins are
structural basins in which have been accumulated deep layers of sedimentary rock.
These basins are surrounded by highlands. These basins are: the Zaire basin; the Sudan
basin; the Chad basin; Eljuf basin; the Libyan basin; the Kalahari basin. One common
feature of each of these basins is that a major river flows in and out of the basin.


The Rift Valley of Africa
Some of the most striking features in the whole continent are the great rift valleys
of east Africa. This huge trough which covers a total of about 9600 km, has been let
down between two sets of parallel faults and is simply a continuation of the great
rift valley of Asia.
    The Rift begins in Jordan and runs south through the red sea. It then passes
through Ethiopia and eventually reaches lake Malawi. In this part of its course, the
African rift valley carries lake Abaya (Ethiopia), Lake Turkana and other lakes as
well as rivers. From Lake Malawi a westerly branch runs northwards to give the
whole formation a Y-shape. The latter branch carries lakes Mobutu, Idi Amin Dada
and Tanganyika.
    The exact course of the Rift valley is best followed by its string of lakes. In
Kenya and neighboring states – the faulting has been accompanied by volcanism.
Elgon, Kenya and Kilimanjaro are the best known examples of the resultant volcanic
mountains.
Geographical Background of Africa                                                  33

Drainage
We can distinguish three broad types of drainage areas in Africa namely: Exoreic,
Areic and Endoreic drainage areas.
    Exoreic drainage involve areas where rivers drain directly to the ocean. Of these
areas which drain to the ocean, a large portion consist of broad low shallow basins
with flows between 1000 and 3000 meters above mean sea level and these basins
are drained by a single outlet. These outlets are narrowly confined where they break
through the rifts of the basins and these outlets are the great Rivers of Africa,
namely: The Nile (white and blue), the Niger with its tributary – Benue, the Congo
river or Zaire river, the Zambezi and the Orange. These major rivers flow into the
structural basins and out of it.
    The Areic drainage areas are areas without organized surface drainage. They are
the semi arid and arid areas, such as the hot deserts, where precipitation is insuf-
ficient to give rise to integrated system of drainage but in such areas past pluvial
phases are seen.
    The remaining areas are those of Endoreic drainage. These areas drain into inland
basins, with no river outlet to the sea. They include Lake Chad Basin, the Makarikari
basin, Lake Rudulf; the Plateaus of Shotts. Some of them constitute salt pans/salt
lakes as can be seen in the case of Makarikari and the Plateaus of Shotts.



Climate
As already known, Africa is the only continent crossed by the Equator and by both
Tropics, Cancer and Capricorn. As three-quarters of its land area lie within the trop-
ics, temperatures are generally high and its climates are mostly tropical or subtrop-
ical in character with temperatures above 20◦ C all the year round. Consequently,
seasons are determined by rainfall. However, there are temperate climates in the
Mediterranean areas of northern Africa and in the southern and south-western parts
of Cape Province in South Africa, and in some of the higher areas of the interior
plateaus. Oceanic influences are generally restricted especially on the western sides
of the continent where the effect of the cold Benguela current, flowing towards the
Equator is very limited. The warm currents of the Indian Ocean have more marked
effects over larger areas, and from them, warm humid air sometimes penetrates far
inland.
   Between November and March, the sun is overhead in the southern hemisphere,
temperature is high and pressure is low in the central part of southern Africa, while
in the northern hemisphere, the opposite is the case. Winds are then drawn to the
low pressure areas – thereby giving heavy rainfall to the Zaire basin and the western
part of Madagascar (over 100 cm). Most parts of West Africa have dry season.
   As the sun is overhead at the tropic of cancer in June, between May and October,
temperature is high in the northern hemisphere and pressure is low. Winds are then
drawn northwards. The southeast trade winds on crossing the equator are deflected
to the right, to become south west winds which give rainfall to West Africa and
34                                                                             B. U. Eze

the greater part of Central Africa. At the southern tip, the northwest wind is drawn
inwards to give rain to the Cape Province.
    As climate is regulated by the apparent movement of the sun between the two
tropics and the associated movement of winds, it (the climate), tends to change in
a similar way in the direction of the north or south of the Equator. This gives rise
to symmetrical climatic zones in Africa consisting of the central zone of equato-
rial climate, two tropical zones, two hot deserts and two Mediterranean zones. It
is noteworthy, however, that this symmetry is only perfect in West Africa. In East
Africa, the climate is modified by altitude and the belts are longitudinal, while in
southern Africa, the modifying factors are the contrasting ocean currents, the pre-
vailing winds and the influence of the highlands.
    Associated with each of these climatic zones is a vegetation type, since the veg-
etation of a region is largely controlled by the climate. This close relationship that
exists between climate and vegetation in tropical Africa, is most obvious in West
Africa where the main vegetation belts, like the climatic regions are arranged in
West-East direction. The reason for this is that rainfall is by far the most single
important factor influencing the natural vegetation of tropical Africa. Climate is
also probably the most important factor in the formation of tropical African soils
through its main elements of temperature and rainfall. The direct influence of cli-
mate through deep weathering and leaching and its direct influence through the veg-
etation cover on the profile and humus content of the soil is considerable. In addition
the vegetation cover protects the soil from accelerated soil erosion and helps to
regulate the moisture content of the soil. Indeed, the relationship between soil and
vegetation is so close that some of the major soil groups, such as rain forest soils
and desert soils, are named after the corresponding vegetation zones. Thus the close
relationship between climate, vegetation and soil is best confirmed by comparing
the generalized soil map of tropical Africa and vegetation. Impliedly, therefore, by
this observed relationship, climate, especially the climatic element of rainfall is also
the most important factor as far as agriculture is concerned in tropical Africa. In
most areas, success or failure depends on the amount, distribution and reliability of
the rainfall. Furthermore, in many rural areas which are located far away from water
courses, rainwater remains the most important source of water for both man and
beast.



Historical Orientation
The dearth of knowledge by people about Africa’s past made them develop all sorts
of misconceptions and wrong judgments about Africa. The vanguards of such mis-
judgments and misconception were the Europeans who were discouraged by their
exploration of the continent by such obstacles as relief, climate, vegetation and soils.
In consequence, Europeans knew little of the people and resources of Africa, and
so, for many years, their main objective was to find a way around, not to try to move
into the land-mass that stretched across the equator and divided the Atlantic from the
Geographical Background of Africa                                                    35

Indian Ocean. However, eventually Africa was explored both along the coastal areas
and the interior leading to the chase and competition among European nations over
the possession of the different territories of Africa and its eventual balkanization.
This activity of Europeans in dividing the various territories of Africa to themselves
came to be popularly called “THE SCRAMBLE FOR AFRICA”.
    However, the Europeans gave a verdict on Africa as the “Dark Continent”. Some
also believe that at the time of colonization, Africa has no political sophistication,
economic organization and artistic achievement. This is a false image of Africa’s
history which has been re-ordered, re-constructed, and re-presented.
    The lateness of European invasion of Africa is itself an evidence of the degree to
which Africans were organized before colonial invasion. Europe has been in com-
mercial contact with Africa for many centuries but could not penetrate until 19th
century. In the area of political consciousness and economic organization, many
strong kingdoms developed in Africa, far before contact with Europeans. For exam-
ple Egypt was the scene of very early civilization. Egyptian pyramids – one of the
wonders of the ancient world, the art of writing, surveying, irrigation engineering,
embalmment – all took place in Egypt irrespective of Europeans.
    In other parts of Africa, there were many strong kingdoms/empires that devel-
oped before colonialism, such as Oyo, Borno, Songhai, Mali, Ghana to mention
but a few; all these kingdoms stood and prospered politically, economically and
artistically.
    From Africa’s Pleistocene statigraphy, we find orderly sequence of objects made
by man’s ancestors ranging from the earliest stone pebble tools to the making of
hand axe. In a place in Tanzania called Olduvai Gorge, there is a sequence of
layers covering 21/2 million years and this shows the sequence in development
of man much better than can be found in any part of the world. Perhaps, in the
later part of this Pleistocene period, the glaciation and alternation of the cold and
warmer periods was reflected in wet and dry areas as in the rift valleys of East
Africa. It was during this period that the use of fire was discovered in Africa, about
60,000 years ago, perhaps to warm the early man. Man sought shelter in caves,
made tools like wooden handle and started to wear the skins of animals. It was
at this time that the Homo Sapiens appeared on the scene of Africa and perhaps
they form the ancestors to the present Khoisan (Bushmen) we find in some parts of
Africa.
    Africa’s first occupants were hunters and gatherers who spent their life in forests.
They lived in small bands, under the guidance of the most skilful hunter who is then
the leader. Shelter was simply made using branches and grasses gathered locally,
while some lived in rock shelters. Some of these inhabitants left the paintings they
made for identification.
    In the North East Africa, there was later arrival and that was the Caucasoid type;
they came in from the way of the middle East and some of them we still find today.
Some of them moved towards the East African lakes and they introduced the idea of
barbs for the arrows. They also introduced special chiseling tools and pottery.
    Some archeologists, anthropologists, linguists and historians have attempted to
reconstruct the coming of man to Africa using language/linguistic phenomena as
36                                                                           B. U. Eze

their guide. They distinguished between Semitic and Kushitic groups of people –
all found in the North East of Africa. There is a group that spoke the Khoisan
language – these existed in southern part of Africa about 5000 years ago.
   The third group – the Niger-Congo stock are found west of lake Chad and are
called West Sudanic people. A study of the individual languages in each group
makes it clear that each group have been developing in separate way from other
groups e.g. the Bantu language are much more related than the others.
   Contact with Asia brought some migrants into Africa who settled along the
shores of East Africa and Malagasy where they formed the ancestors of the present
day Malagasy people (Indonesia).
   Agricultural revolution in Africa started about 3000 BC. and it is believed that
agriculture was invented in West Africa independent of other countries like South
East Asia. This started with the growing of cereals, learnt first in the Savanna land
and so spread to forest lands and East Africa. Contact with other parts of world
resulted in the introduction of other crops from other areas. After Africans learnt
agriculture, it enabled them to live in groups, and villages with political and eco-
nomic consciousness.


Africa in the Recent History
As already established, Africa was eventually colonized and between about 1880
and the beginning of twentieth century, several European states including Great
Britain, France, Belgium Germany and Portugal were all involved in the “scramble
for Africa”. By the outbreak of the first world war in 1914 nearly every part of
African continent had been occupied by some European nation so that inevitably
many areas were affected by the events of the war and by the subsequent peace
treaties. Some of the colonial powers organized the development of trade, built rail-
ways, road, and ports, and encouraged the production of cash crops gotten cheaply
because of the tropical nature of the continent to feed the industrial and commercial
interests of western Europe – this being the burning reason for their blatant scramble
for African territories.
   In some countries, efforts were made to establish settlements of white people
using African domestic and farm labour, as in South Africa, Zimbabwe, and Kenya.
In places minerals were discovered and exploited. Elsewhere the coming of colonial
rule meant little more than establishment of law and order and the imposition of
taxes and sometimes of military conscription.


Political Independence
During the first half of the twentieth century most of Africa was still being admin-
istered by these colonial powers, but internal political movements together with a
new understanding of the hopes and ambitions of the African peoples have changed
the political map of Africa during the last five decades. Before the second world
Geographical Background of Africa                                                  37




Fig. 3 Africa: political divisions
Source: Abegunde et al. (1990)



war only Liberia, a republic since 1847, Egypt with its independence recognized
from 1922, and South Africa, where the union was created in 1910, could claim real
political independence. Today by contrast, all parts of Africa (Fig. 3) can be said to
have gotten political independence.



Population Distribution
Africa as a whole is not a densely populated continent having a figure of 8.6 per
sq.km. Figures for the individual countries are, of course, misleading and some-
times hide as much as they reveal. Egypt for example has an average density of
38                                                                               B. U. Eze

33 per sq. km, but it includes large areas that are almost uninhabited whereas the
average density of population is well over 200 per sq. km along the Nile valley.
    In very general terms, it may be said that the greater the rainfall in any part of
Africa, the denser the population, with Egypt as exception to the rule, which through
irrigation application, the arid lands along the Nile supports one of the densest pop-
ulations in Africa. In the Sahara, however, the scanty rainfall has produced a vast
region of 61/2 million sq. km where there is scarcely any settled population at all
except at occasional oases; this same scanty population applies to the Namib and
the Kalahari deserts and greater parts of the dense tropical rain forests.
    In conclusion, it should be noted that the population density of Africa is above the
average for the continent in Egypt, in the Guinealands, on the East African plateau
around the lakes e.g. lake Victoria, on the coastlands of East Africa, the Mediter-
ranean coastlands of North-West Africa and in Ethiopia. With the single exception
of irrigated Egypt, all these areas have a mean annual rainfall of over 600 mm.
Favourable climate, good soil, accessibility and presence of minerals favour high
population density in Africa. Nigeria is the most populous country in Africa with a
population of approximately 140 million as at year 2006.


General Conclusion
In the introductory note of this work, it was made abundantly clear that this was
going to be a basic outline and this promise has been kept true. Not all the necessary
topics came in and even those that came in received just a cursory examination.
However, one hopes that no matter how skeletal the presentation, a casual onlooker
would have been familiarized to an extent with the continent – AFRICA.


Bibliography
 1. Abegunde, M. A; Adegoke, K. A; Onwumere G. and Dahiru A; (1990): Senior Secondary
    Geography 2. Longman, Nigeria.
 2. Coysh A. W. and Tomlinson M. E (1974): Modern Geography Series: AFRICA. UTP, London
 3. Eze, B. U. (2006) Lecture notes on Geography of African Development. Dept. of Geography
    and Meteorology, ESUT.
 4. Murray Allan (1978): The Study Map Note Books; AFRICA, Collins, London.
 5. Okoye T. (1987): Lecture Notes on Regional Geography of Africa: Dept of Geography, UNN.
 6. W. S. Robert and Steel E.M. (1980): Geographies: a Certificate Series. AFRICA. Longman
    Group Limited, London.
The Astronomical Gnomon
A Series of Interactive Experiments
in Archaeoastronomy

J. McKim Malville




The gnomon is the part of a sundial that casts the shadow, and it is probably also
the world’s oldest astronomical instrument. As basic as a pole stuck in sand, the
gnomon may have been used to measure the passage of time by nomadic cultures
of the Sahara for millennia. In the much later high cultures of the Nile Valley, the
gnomon could have been used to determine the direction to true north for pyramids,
palaces, and temples.
    For those who carefully watched, the moving shadow of the gnomon revealed a
profound symmetry in nature, a space-time pattern that connected heaven and earth.
In the afternoon the tip of the shadow traces a pattern in the sand similar to that of
the morning. The patterns are mirror images of each other, lying across an imaginary
line of symmetry. That line pointed to a mysterious area to the north, around which
all the stars of the sky revolve. This realm of the north, where stars never set, was
viewed by the Egyptians as a timeless place of eternity.
    There is more to the gnomon, for it also measures time by the tip of its moving
shadow. The patterns on the sand are symmetrical about that time when the sun
reaches its highest point in the sky, when the shadow is shortest.
    Over the centuries the simple wooden pole in the sand was transformed into the
tall stone obelisks of Egypt, a symbol of the axis mundi the line connecting heaven
and earth. Obylists and gnomons may also have been perceived symbolic ladders to
climb to the heavenly realms.
    The earliest evidence of attention in Egypt to the norther regions of the sky comes
from Nabta Playa where a ceremonial center was built by cattle herders on the edge
of a seasonal lake, watered by summer solstice rains The area was occupied by no-
madic pastoralists starting about 9000 B.C. and around 4500 B.C. it developed into
a regional ceremonial center. In the area Nabta Playa, a gnomon (Figure 1), human
and cow burials as well as a calendar circle (Figures 2 & 3) reveal the importance of
north to these nomads.
    Now we have Polaris, but for most of human history there has been no star at the
north celestial pole. Previous cultured need a more indirect method of establishing

J. McKim Malville
University of Colorado, (303) 492-8766
E-mail: kim.malville@colorado.edu


J. Holbrook et al. (eds.), African Cultural Astronomy – Current Archaeoastronomy
and Ethnoastronomy Research in Africa.     C Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2008   39
40                                                                        J. M. Malville




Fig. 1 Gnomon at Nabta Playa


north than simply aligning themselves with a pole star. One way is pay attention the
rising and setting stars around the northern regions. Since the horizon is so nearly
flat in much of the Saharan desert ancient sky watchers could have observed the
rising and setting positions of the sun or bright stars in the north such as Arcturus
and then split the difference to determine north. The problem with such a method is
that is requires that the horizon be really flat. Any irregularities would have shifted
the rising positions of the sun or stars. At low latitudes, however, the shift would be
small.
    The approximate direction to north could have simply been estimated by aligning
with the vacant center of the zone of the sky where stars never set. Or, they could
have used shadow casting by a gnomon, as we shall demonstrate in this experiment.
The Astronomical Gnomon                                                            41

Fig. 2 Diagram of Nabta
calendar circle




The History of the Gnomon

The incorporation of gnomons in sun dials extends at least to the 6th century BCE.
Anaximander of Miletus is believed to have introduced sundials to Greece dur-
ing the 6th century BCE. The Greeks had many public sundials consisting of tall
columns casting shadows onto the ground, and many citizens had their own sundials.
Aristophanes’ play “The Frogs” written in 405 BCE (Tucker 1906) contains the line
“When the shadow is ten steps long, come to dinner.”
   About 340BCE Berosus, a Chaldean astronomer-priest living in Egypt during
the time of Alexander the Great, developed the hemisphericum, in which a vertical
post was placed centrally inside a hollowed out hemisphere. The inside surface of
the hemisphere had vertical lines carved on it to divide the daylight period into 12
hours, and horizontal lines to show the seasons. The shadow cast on the inside hemi-
spherical marked out the path of the sun as it traveled across the sky; the hemisphere
on earth mirrored that of the heavens, making this device an obvious metaphor for
the parallelism of macrocosm and microcosm.
   About 100 BCE the Tower of the Winds was erected in Athens at the foot of the
north slope of the Acropolis. This octagonal tower had walls which faced the 8 cardi-
nal and inter-cardinal directions North, South, East, West, North-East, North-West,




Fig. 3 Nabta calendar circle
42                                                                            J. M. Malville

South-East and South-West. It is so named because each wall features a carving with
allegorical representations of the wind which blows from that particular direction.
A horizontal rod gnomon was reportedly carved into each wall, although it is not
clear how a horizontal gnomon on the north wall would have functioned. The angle
of the shadow on each sundial told the time, while the length of the shadows told the
date, and the tower building thereby acted as both clock and calendar. The Tower
was accurately aligned North-South, so the sundial markings on the complementary
faces (e.g., NE and SW) were repeated as mirror images, usable in the morning and
afternoons, respectively.
    Some time in the 14th century in Europe the gnomon of a sundial ceased being
either vertical or horizontal, and was first inclined at an angle equal to the latitude to
make it parallel to the axis of rotation of the Earth. The result was that the varying
length of the shadow of gnomon-sundial no longer established north-south. How-
ever, when so constructed the shadow moved uniformly with the sun and thus the
sundials began to tell time according to the system of equal hours. By about this
time mechanical clocks which divided the day into 24 equal hours started to appear.
They were rare, expensive, and not very accurate, often wrong by several hours. The
mechanical clocks needed to be calibrated by sundials, probably at the time of local
solar noon.
    When the entire dial is tilted toward the north celestial pole and the gnomon is
exactly parallel to the axis of the earth, one has constructed a miniature earth. When
the dial is tilted to the earth’s pole it mimics the earths equatorial plane, as illustrated
in this picture of the sun dial at the University of Colorado (Figure 4).



Experiments

1. Establish the direction to true north.

     a. Approximate Method: The easiest method to establish north-south is to
        erect a gnomon and place markers at the tip of the shadow over the course
        of the day and note where is it shortest. You will notice that the tip of the
        shadow is diffuse because of the penumbra of the shadow. Try to be consistent
        in marking the center of the shadow. An approximate north-south line can
        be drawn between the gnomon and the place where the shadow is shortest.
        Because the speed of the earth in its orbit varies throughout the year, solar
        noon differs from 12:00 standard time by up to 16 minutes. That difference
        is known as the equation of time. Because it is difficult to establish the time
        when the shadow is shortest, this method is not as accurate as the next one
        described below. But, you can use the length of that line to determine the
        altitude of the sun at noon (Figure 5). Once the altitude is determined, you
        can calculate the declination of the sun (Figure 6) (which is, declination
        (δ) = altitude + latitude − 90) and you can develop a table for the annual
        variation of the declination of the sun.
The Astronomical Gnomon                                                         43

Fig. 4 Sundial at the
University of Colorado. The
gnomon is pointing toward
the north celestial pole, which
in Boulder is 30◦ above the
horizon




   b. Standard Method: Take a pole around 4–6 feet tall and place it in the ground,
      getting it as vertical as possible using a plumb bob (Figure 7). In order to
      achieve the greatest precision in the measurement of true north (or south),
      the ground should be as flat as possible. Using a rope attached to the pole,
      mark out a circle of such diameter that at mid-morning and mid- afternoon the




Fig. 5 Altitude of the sun as
determined by the length of
the shadow of the gnomon
44                                                                        J. M. Malville

Fig. 6 Declination of the sun
as determined by its altitude
(E: ecliptic; P, north celestial
pole; S, southern horizon;
N, northern horizon,
α, measured altitude of the
sun; φ, latitude;
δ, declination)




       shadow crosses the circle. The line connecting those two crossing establishes
       east-west. A perpendicular to that line established north-south.
       This technique relies on the almost perfect symmetry of the sun’s motion
       across the sky around the north-south line, which is known as the local merid-
       ian. The symmetry is perfect at the solstices when the declination of the
       sun does not change between morning and evening. The broken symmetry
       becomes greatest at equinox when the sun is changing its declination most
       rapidly, but even then the effect is small. In their attempt to achieve absolute
       perfection in constructing Hindu temples, the architects of ancient India de-
       veloped several methods for correcting for the broken symmetry, which are
       discussed in the Appendix.




Fig. 7 Standard method for
determining true north
The Astronomical Gnomon                                                                      45




Fig. 8 Gnomon shadows at northern mid-latitudes. The arrow indicates east-west as established
by the two places where the shadow crosses the circle drawn around the gnomon. The dot indicates
the position of the gnomon


           Patterns of the gnomon shadow for mid-northern latitudes (Figure 8) and
       the equator (Figure 9a) are shown below. Note that at the equator, there is no
       shadow cast by the gnomon at solar noon on the day of equinox. Throughout
       the tropics, between the Tropic of Cancer and Tropic of Capricorn, there will
       be days when the sun is at the zenith and the gnomon will cast no shadow.
       The shadow pattern is unique at the equator, on the Tropics of Cancer and
       Capricorn, on the Antarctic and Arctic circles, as well as at the poles. With
       their symmetries, these patterns have great aesthetic appeal. It is not unrea-
       sonable to imagine that some formed the inspiration for the designs of rock
       art, ceramic decorations, and weaving patterns in the ancient world.

2. Compare with Magnetic Compass: Measure the difference between true north
   established with north determined by a magnetic compass and your measurement
   of north. The difference is the magnetic declination. Compare your measured
   magnetic declination with that established by a theoretical model of the earth’s
   magnetic field found at www.ngdc.noaa.gov/seg/geomag/jsp/Declination.jsp
3. GPS Measurements: Because the uncertainty of positions by a Global Posi-
   tioning System Unite (GPS) is typically plus/minus 5 meters, you will need a
   long base line to establish the line precisely. With your GPS measure latitude
46                                                                              J. M. Malville




Fig. 9a Gnomon shadows at the equator




Fig. 9b Asymmetry of shadow patterns: difference in minutes of arc between morning and evening
due to the changing declination of the sun over a four hour period
The Astronomical Gnomon                                                              47

   and longitude of the gnomon. Move either north or south away from the gnomon
   along the north-south line established by the shadow casting by the gnomon. A
   friend positioned behind the gnomon can assist you in keeping in line. Go to the
   greatest distance you can go and still see the GPS from the gnomon, measure its
   latitude and longitude at this distance. Determine the difference in latitude and
   longitude between the gnomon and the end of the north-south line.
   The angular distance between true north determined by the GPS and that of
   the gnomon is j = arctan[ (difference in longitude x cos(lat) )/difference in
   latitude) ]
4. North Star (Figure 10): If you are north of the equator, using a second person
   with a flashlight, establish a north-south line using the North Star and then com-
   pare with your other north-south lines. Polaris is now nearly 45’/cos(lat) away
   from the north celestial pole; in order to reduce the error in azimuth one could
   observe Polaris when it is in upper or lower culmination, i.e. exactly above or
   below the pole. Tables in the Astronomical Almanac can be used to determine
   the true azimuth of the Pole Star and when best to observe it. It is only in the last
   few centuries that the star we know as Polaris has been close enough to be useful
   for determining true north.
5. Theodolite: If you can get access to a theodolite, some of these measurements
   of true north-south can be made more precisely, such as the location of polaris
   or a distant GPS. High precision can be achieved by measuring the position of
   Polaris or a person holding a GPS at a distance of several miles.




Fig. 10 Changing position of the north celestial pole from 4000 BC to AD 3000
48                                                                         J. M. Malville

Appendix

Shadow Casting by the Gnomon in India

Measurement as Ritual
The achievement of such extraordinary accuracy in locating the north-south axis
of certain Hindu temples and cities results from two reinforcing themes in Indian
architecture. Not only were techniques developed for precision measurements of
the sun, but there was a robust religious support for such precision. The very act of
measurement was understood to be a re-enactment of creation.
    In Hindu tradition Prajapati, who is the Year, measures the world, both in space
and time, with his eye, the sun. Purusha, identified with Visvakarman, the archi-
tect of the universe, “bears the measuring rod (mana), knows divisions, and thinks
himself composed of parts (Vayu-purana IV.30–31: Kramrisch 1941:131).
    Both Vishnu and Varuna use the sun as their measuring instrument to measure
the earth (Rig Veda VI.49.13; V.85.5). “What precedes the sun is timeless (akala)
and undivided (akala); but what begins with the sun is Time that has divisions and
its form is the year” (Maitri Upanisad VII.11.8). In its daily movement from dawn
to sunset the sun measures the earth along its east-west path and establishes those
two directions of space. At its highest point the sun establishes the north-south axis.
On certain days of the year between the Tropics of Cancer and Capricorn, the sun
reaches the zenith of the sky, thereby establishing the fifth and six directions of
zenith and anti-zenith. During its annual movement the sun moves eastward along
the ecliptic approximately 1◦ per day, marking thereby the days, the four seasons, as
well as the dates when the sun emerges from the cosmic ocean (at vernal equinox)
and sinks back into the cosmic ocean (at autumnal equinox).
    To measure ma is to give existence to a thing, to give it reality in our world. Maya,
or manifestation, refers to division of the original, undivided Whole, and is the illu-
sory world created when Purusa performed division upon himself (Zimmer 1946).
    Recognition of the role of measurement in cosmogony extends far back into the
past time of India. The Vedic altar was reconstructed each year near the time of
vernal equinox as a symbolic reconstruction of Prajapati, the year (Kramrisch 1981).
Built of five layers, representing the five seasons and the five directions, the altar
was surrounded by a wall of 360 bricks acknowledging that the year is bounded
by 360 days. During the building of the wall 1200 syllables were recited at the
laying of each stone, resulting in a total of 432,000 syllables built into the wall
(Satapatha Brahmana X.4.2.30). There are 432,000 syllables in the Rig Veda, and
432,000 years in the Kali Yuga. The altar itself was constructed with 10,800 bricks
corresponding to the number of hours in the year with 30 hour days (Satapatha
Brahmana X.4.2.18).
    The importance of precise orientation and measurement in construction of the
temple reveals the cosmogonic symbolism involved in the act. The Sanskrit term
referring to the temple, vimana, means “well-measured” or “well-proportioned”.
Texts on temple architecture give extensive discussions of the system of proportional
The Astronomical Gnomon                                                               49

measurements which should determine all feature of the temple. The basic unit used
in the Ajitagama and Rauravagama (Dagens 1984) is a “speck of dust” (rajas) as
seen in a beam of light. The series of units extends upward through a hair end, nit,
louse, to the barley grain which is 85 specks of dust in size. Other common units are
the digit, angula, which may be 6, 7, or 8 barley grains and the cubit, which for the
measurement of temples is 25 angula (Dagens 1984). Only if the temple was built
with proper and precise units could it function effectively (Michell 1988).
    The orientation of the site had to be established at the time when the sun was in the
northern part of the sky, i.e. when it was above the cosmic ocean, on a day when there
were no spots on its visible surface. A pillar, the gnomon, was erected and used to
cast measured shadows. At one level of meaning that pillar represents the God Indra
who “pillared apart” heaven and earth, supported the heaven and steadied the earth
(Kramrisch 1991). “The building of every sacred shrine was a paradigmatic reiteration
of the archetypal separation of heaven and earth” (Irwin 1991). Irwin (1981, 1983)
has extensively discussed the symbolism of Asokan (and pre-Asokan) pillars with
regard to pillar worship in India. The yupa, a sacrificial post, the lingam, the cen-
tral pole of a tent used for dance, and the tree are other examples of sacred or
ritual pillars. The stalk of the lotus bearing Brahma, the four-faced creator of the
universe, is another cosmogonic pillar from which creation emanates.
    In the gnomon we encounter the remarkable union of a technical device used to
determine true cardinality with a powerful cosmogonic symbol. The gnomon should
have a circumference at its base equal to its height, tapering to 1/3 this circumference
at its top (Ajitagama: Dagens 1984). It is placed in a square area, which had to be
“as smooth as a mirror”, checked with a water level. Around the gnomon is traced a
circle with a radius equal to the height of the gnomon. Two points are marked on the
circle where the shadow of the gnomon touches it at midmorning and midafternoon.
These two points are joined by a straight line which is close to true east-west.
    This method, often referred to as the Indian Circle method, produces an align-
ment to the true cardinal directions which is only approximately accurate during
most of the year. Moving between its winter and southern extremes at the solstices,
the sun changes declination most rapidly at the equinoxes (Figure 9b: in the figure
the day count starts at spring equinox where the difference is zero; at 90 days and
270 days the difference is at a maximum). At the time of vernal equinox, for ex-
ample, since the sun moves northward between midmorning and midafternoon, the
eastern point, produced by the afternoon shadow is shifted slightly southward of the
western point. The line connecting the two points would thus be tilted south of east
in the spring and north of east in the fall.
    Brahmagupta (born AD 598) is credited with the first recorded recognition of this
defect of the method (Yano 1986), although he did not give a formula for correction.
Apparently in AD 864, Prithudakasvamin knew of the formula but did not succeed
in versifying it in Sanskrit and hence was not given full credit. In the classical age
of India, one could not claim priority for a scientific discovery, unless one could
express it in Sanskrit verse. Sripati (AD 1039) was the first who successfully versi-
fied the formula, and after him the formula apparently became common knowledge
among Indian astronomers (Yano 1986):
50                                                                         J. M. Malville

                    s = h[sin(dec1 ) − sin(dec2 )]/ sin(co-latitude)

where s is the distance of the tip of the shadow from the east-west line, h is the
hypotenuse of the shadow, and dec1 and dec2 are the respective declinations of the
sun at the time in the morning and afternoon when the shadows touch the circle.
   Even on the days of equinox, the effects of the movement of the sun in declination
are quite slight. During 6 hours from midmorning to midafternoon, the declination
of the sun varies at most by 6 minutes of arc. On the ground beneath the gnomon
the error would amount to 2.6 cm for a 10 meter tall pole at latitude of 20 ◦ on the
day of equinox.
   The amount, by which the sun changes its declination during the day, decreases
as the sun moves away from equinox and at solstice the change is zero. For the two
month period around solstice, the maximum error is only 3’ and within 10 days of
solstice, the maximum error has fallen to 1’, and the correction formula is hardly
needed.
   A second method of correcting the gnomon technique involved drawing three
concentric circles around the base of the gnomon. This method did not require the
equation of Sripati nor knowledge of the declination of the sun or the latitude of
the site. At equinox the lines connecting the three pairs of point could differ from
true east-west by 9 , 6 , and 3 and the trend of these of deviations could be used to
correct any one of the lines.
   A third approach was to measure the shadow length on two successive days at
the same time in the morning. The position of the afternoon shadow on the first day
was corrected by 1/3 the difference of the morning positions.
   Measurements with a gnomon could have been limited to periods around the
solstices when the method yielded accurate cardinality, but additional considerations
such as auspicious dates for the patron may have demanded dates closer to equinox.
The vernal equinox, itself, was a significant time when the sun moved from the
lower celestial waters to the more auspicious upper waters. Since the sun rises due
east at equinox, that date may also have seemed most appropriate for laying out the
ground plan of the temple which faces east.



Glossary
Prajapati: The Lord of the Creatures; primordial creator; the constellation of Orion,
associated in the sky with his daughter, Rohini (Aldebaran).
   Purusha: Another cosmogonic figure similar to Prajapati; a creative source; a
creator who was sacrificed; his dismembered body became all of the world and
heavens.
   Varuna: An early Vedic god representing the sky and representing celestial order.
   Vijananagara: Great Hindu kingdom of southern India, destroyed in 1565; largest
ruined city in the world.
   Vishnu: Preserver of the universe.
The Astronomical Gnomon                                                                     51

References
Kramrisch, Malville, J. McKim “Cosmic Landscape and Urban Layout” in New Light on Hampi,
   edited by George Michell and John Fritz. Mumbai: Marg Publications, pp. 112–125, 2001.
“The Cosmologies of India” in The Encyclopaedia of Non-Western Sciences, edited by Helaine
   Selin, Springer, 2007.
Malville, J. McKim and John M. Fritz “Cosmos and Kings in Vijayanagara” in Astronomies and
   Cultures, edited by C. Ruggles and N Saunders, Niwot: University Press of Colorado, pp. 139–
   162. 1993.
“Recent Archaeo-astronomical Research At Vijayanagara”, South Asian Archaeology, 1991, edited
   by A. J. Gail and G. J.R. Mevissen, pp. 415–425, Steiner Verlag, Stuttgart, 1993.
Malville, J. McKim, Fred Wendorf, Ali Mazar, and Romauld Schild “Megaliths and Neolithic
   Astronomy in Southern Egypt”. Nature, 392, 488–491, 1998.
Yano, M. “Knowledge of Astronomy in Sanskrit Texts of Architecture.” Indo-Iranian Journal,
   29:17–21, 1986.
Naked-eye Astronomy for Cultural Astronomers

J. C. Holbrook and Audra Baleisis




Abstract Cultural astronomy is an interdisciplinary field that attracts students from
a variety of backgrounds. Many students have a background in astronomy, but even
in astronomy departments students are not taught some of the most basic elements
of the night sky needed for cultural astronomy research. For example, few students
are taught constellation identification which is part of the foundation of cultural
astronomy research. This paper seeks to introduce students to the information and
skills needed to do cultural astronomy research effectively.

The Night Sky
The most difficult task for cultural astronomy students is to learn the night sky. Most
students are familiar with the beautiful images taken with telescopes and satellites
such as the Orion Nebula and the Andromeda galaxy. However, students are not
as familiar with the night sky’s stars and constellations visible without the aid of
telescopes or binoculars. There are 88 constellations as set forth by the International
Astronomical Union (IAU) (Table 1). However, knowing the names of the constella-
tions is not as useful as knowing their locations in the night sky and their “shapes.” It
is useful to know what constellations are immediately adjacent to each other, as well.
    For example, an informant points to a dim set of stars to the east of the con-
stellation Cassiopeia. The constellations bordering the east side of Cassiopeia are
Camelopardalis and Perseus, whose :“shapes” are markedly different with Perseus
being composed of relatively bright stars but a less recognizable shape than Cas-
siopeia. Thus, the researcher first identifies Cassiopeia, then whether the informant
is pointing to Perseus or Camelopardalis, then can identify a particular star, etc. Fur-
ther, the informant may only be familiar with local names of asterisms – groupings
of stars, which may not correspond in any way to the IAU constellations. The Big
Dipper, for example, is one of the most famous asterisms, and is part of the formal


Jarita C Holbrook
Bureau of Applied Research in Anthropology, University of Arizona
FAX: +1-520-621-9608
E-mail: holbrook@u.arizona.edu


J. Holbrook et al. (eds.), African Cultural Astronomy – Current Archaeoastronomy
and Ethnoastronomy Research in Africa.     C Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2008   53
54                                                               J. C. Holbrook, A. Baleisis

Table 1 The names of the 88 constellations
Andromeda         Centaurus          Fornax         Monoceros          Scorpius
Antlia            Cepheus            Gemini         Musca              Sculptor
Apus              Cetus              Grus           Norma              Scutum
Aquarius          Chamaleon          Hercules       Octans             Serpens
Aquila            Circinus           Horologium     Ophiucus           Sextans
Ara               Columba            Hydra          Orion              Taurus
Aries             Coma Berenices     Hydrus         Pavo               Telescopium
Auriga            Corona Australis   Indus          Pegasus            Triangulum
Bootes            Corona Borealis    Lacerta        Perseus            Triangulum Australe
Caelum            Corvus             Leo            Phoenix            Tucana
Camelopardalis    Crater             Leo Minor      Pictor             Ursa Major
Cancer            Crux               Lepus          Pisces             Ursa Minor
Canes Venatici    Cygnus             Libra          Pisces Austrinus   Vela
Canis Major       Delphinus          Lupus          Puppis             Virgo
Canis Minor       Dorado             Lynx           Pyxis              Volans
Capricornus       Draco              Lyra           Reticulum          Vulpecula
Carina            Equuleus           Mensa          Sagitta
Cassiopeia        Eridanus           Microscopium   Sagittarius


IAU constellation, Ursa Major. Thus, it is very important that the researcher is able
to identify both the constellation and the star of interest to be able cross list local
names with the IAU standard names.


What is the Easiest Way to Learn the Constellations?
There are several ways to learn the constellations and their locations in the sky.
Probably, the easiest is to get planispheres of the northern and southern hemisphere
and start memorizing! A planisphere is a circular map of the night sky showing
the stars and constellations. Planispheres are made for observing the night sky at
different latitudes. For observing in the United States, a planisphere of latitude 40
degrees north is usually sufficient. Planispheres are usually available for purchase at
planetariums and observatories, they can also be ordered online at “Shop at Sky”[2]
and other shopping sites.
   Paper star charts can be downloaded from the internet via “Your Sky” [3],
“Starmaps.com” [4], “Sky & Telescope” [5], and “The Night Sky” [6]. Star charts
without labels can be used to practice identifying constellations. Or star charts with
the shapes of the constellations can be used for easier identification.
   Having access to a good software program, that can recreate the night sky at any
location and at anytime during the last 6000 years, is very important for cultural astron-
omy researchers. The software allows the user to adjust multiple variables to recreate
what the sky looks like at a field site. Most researchers do not have the money or time
to spend an entire year at a field site, so via the software they can explore the sky
at other times during the year. For example: A researcher collected drawings from
an informant of the positions of many stars rising in the east at sunset on the day of
an important ceremony. The researcher can then use the night sky software to watch
Naked-eye Astronomy for Cultural Astronomers                                              55




Fig. 1 HPLANET night sky image of Cassiopeia, Camelopardalis, and Perseus. With constellation
borders
Source: Walker, J., Home Planet – HPLANET. 1994, Fourmi Laboratory. Software. http://www.
fourmilab.ch/homeplanet/homeplanet.htm

the eastern horizon over time until the star positions match the drawing. Night sky
software that is available free of charge is HPLANET [7] and Stellarium [8].
    Another way to start learning your way across the night sky is to find someone
who is already familiar with the constellations and is willing to give you an intro-
duction. This is also a good way to bring the knowledge you gain from using a
planisphere, a sky chart or with a software program, outside to the real sky. The ac-
tual night sky can look very different from anything on paper or a computer screen.
It is very useful to learn to find a star that is shown on a chart also in the night sky
and vice versa.
    Finally, this introduction to the night sky is descriptive – we are pointing out
facts about motions in the sky rather than spending much time explaining the un-
derlying models of these motions. If you are interested in learning the underlying
ideas about why the stars and planets move the way they do, we recommend you
find an introductory astronomy book. A book for non-science majors in college may
be a good place to start. If you have the time and resources, an introductory course
56                                                             J. C. Holbrook, A. Baleisis




Fig. 2 Zulu night sky from Snedegar [1]

is even better. By learning about the space motions of Earth, the Sun, the Moon and
the stars, you will better understand why the Sun does not always rise exactly East
and set exactly West, why the stars visible in the night sky change throughout the
year, and be able to bring that understanding with you to the field as an additional
tool for cultural astronomy research.


The Bright Stars
Star brightness is measured in magnitudes, where the smaller the magnitude the
brighter the star. Given low levels of light pollution, humans can see stars to a limit
of about 6 magnitudes. At 5.5 magnitudes 2860 stars are visible [9]. However, not
all of these have names nor are easily identifiable. Table 2 lists the thirty brightest
Naked-eye Astronomy for Cultural Astronomers                                     57

                                 Table 2 Thirty brightest stars
        Star                                Name                      M
        alpha Canis Major                    Sirius                   −1.46
        alpha Carina                         Canopus                  −0.72
        alpha Centaurus                      Rigil Kent               −0.01
        alpha Bootes                         Arcturus                 −0.04
        alpha Lyra                           Vega                      0.03
        alpha Auriga                         Capella                   0.08
        beta Orion                           Rigel                     0.12
        alpha Canis Minor                    Procyon                   0.38
        alpha Eridani                        Archenar                  0.46
        alpha Orion                          Beteigeuse                0.5
        beta Centaurus                       Hadar                     0.61
        alpha Aquila                         Altair                    0.77
        alpha Taurus                         Aldebaran                 0.85
        alpha Virgo                          Spica                     0.98
        alpha Scorpius                       Antares                   0.96
        beta Gemini                          Pollux                    1.14
        alpha Piscis Austrinus               Fomalhaut                 1.16
        alpha Cygnus                         Deneb                     1.25
        beta Crux                            Mimosa                    1.25
        alpha Leo                            Regulus                   1.35
        epsilon Canis Major                  Adhara                    1.5
        alpha Crux                           Acrux                     1.58
        alpha Gemini                         Castor                    1.58
        gamma Crux                           Gacrux                    1.63
        lambda Scorpius                      Shaula                    1.63
        gamma Orion                          Bellatrix                 1.64
        beta Taurus                          El Nath                   1.65
        beta Carina                          Miaplacidus               1.68
        epsilon Orion                        Alnilam                   1.7
        alpha Grus                           Al Na’ir                  1.74
        epsilon Ursa Major                   Alioth                    1.77
        gamma Vela                           Regor                     1.78
        alpha Perseus                        Marfak (Algenib)          1.79
        alpha Ursa Major                     Dubhe                     1.79
        delta Canis Major                    Al Wazor                  1.84
        epsilon Sagittarius                  Kaus Australis            1.85




stars in the night sky. It includes both northern and southern hemisphere stars and
in which constellation they are located. Knowing the bright stars helps in the iden-
tification of fainter stars and their constellations.
    Learning how to identify stars and constellations takes time, months and years,
not hours. If you need help identifying constellations, again, check with your local
amateur astronomy club. These clubs consist of astronomy enthusiasts who host
“star parties” to which they bring their telescopes out for the public to use and to
teach about the night sky. Members of these clubs can know a lot about the naked-
eye night sky.
58                                                              J. C. Holbrook, A. Baleisis

Fig. 3 Image of a northern
hemisphere planisphere




Going Outside

Armed with your star chart or planisphere go outside and look up. It may take as
long as 15 or 20 minutes for your eyes to adjust to the dark, and for you to see
many stars. Only one flash of a white car headlight or misdirected flashlight can
force you to start over! So, in order to read your starchart or find your way around,
you need a red flashlight or red laser pointer. Using red light keeps your eyes dark
adapted.




Fig. 4 Planisphere of the northern hemisphere with constellation shapes and without
Source: Walker, J., Home Planet – HPLANET. 1994, Fourmi Laboratory. Software. http://www.
fourmilab.ch/homeplanet/homeplanet.htm
Naked-eye Astronomy for Cultural Astronomers                                                     59




Fig. 5 Part of a Stellarium screenshot with an arrow inserted showing how to find Arcturus from
the handle of the big dipper
Source: Chereau, F., Stellarium Software. 2001. http:// stellarium.sourceforge.net/




Fig. 6 Deciding when the star Canopus rises over a horizon may depend on what is on your hori-
zon. Here there is (1) a farmland horizon, (2) a forest horizon, and (3) and ocean horizon, which is
also the ideal horizon
Source: Chereau
60                                                              J. C. Holbrook, A. Baleisis

   Once your eyes are adapted to the dark, start looking up and noticing what you
see. Finding stars and constellations in the sky does not just depend on your eyes
being dark adapted – it also depends on how familiar you are with what you are
looking for. The first time you go out may be frustrating, but remember it is part of
a learning process, which means that you will get better with practice. If you can
identify one constellation at first, you’ve begun. Next you might try to figure out
some way to find a second constellation using a star chart, and the first constellation.
   For instance, most Northern Hemisphere observers can find the Big Dipper. You
can use this asterism to find a number of other stars and constellations. If you follow
the curve of the handle of the dipper, away from the dipper itself, you “arc to Arc-
turus,” the bright orange-tinted star in the constellation Bootes. Look on your map
or chart first, see how this is done, and then try it outside.


Looking Around
If you were only interested in learning to identify constellations and didn’t need to
go further, you might stop here. But for doing cultural astronomy, there are a number
of other important variables related to the sky. Considered here are the horizon, the
cardinal direction, apparent distances, and direction angles.

The Horizon
To judge when a star (whether in the night sky, or you’re looking for the Sun) or
a planet rises or sets, you need to have a reference point, and this will depend on
where you are when you are doing your observations. The first important reference
point is the horizon. The horizon is the line at which the Earth’s surface and the
sky seem to meet. In real life, there might be mountains or forests or a city skyline
in the distance from where you are standing. An extreme example of this is if you
go out to look at the sky and stand very close to the building you just left. There
will be part of the sky that is blocked by that building. Just keep in mind that where
you stand (e.g. changes in distance of only a mile or so) might affect what your
distant horizon looks like, and in turn, when celestial objects will rise or set past it.
The ideal horizon, the one that you will be dealing with if you use any night sky
software, is where the Earth’s surface, at sea-level, would meet the sky if you could
flatten all the mountains and remove all the trees. When you are looking out over an
ocean or a sea, you can see an ideal horizon.

The Cardinal Points: N, E, S, W
The horizon is not the only reference system that is relative to you, the observer.
There are also the cardinal points – the compass directions: North, East, South and
West. It is important to know where these are along a horizon because they will help
you interpret certain measurements like the rising and setting of objects in the sky.
A compass can help you find these directions at a field site. Or ideally, you should
learn which direction is north from the position of the constellations. The Big Dipper
Naked-eye Astronomy for Cultural Astronomers                                       61




Fig. 7 Diagram of Ursa major and how to find Polaris
Source: Walker


and Cassiopea are two of the northernmost easily identified constellations. Both can
be used to find Polaris, the star that marks north, also called the North Star.
   Figure 7 and 8 show how a researcher uses these constellations to find north.
   Similarly, there are the southernmost constellations. The Magellanic Clouds and
the Southern Cross are used to find the general direction of south (Fig. 9). Unfortu-
nately, there is no star like Polaris to mark south.

Distances in the Sky
There is one last basic reference system to consider. Think about answering the
question, “how far west of the mountain peak did the star Canis Major rise?” This is
not a question that can be answered with traditional distance units like miles, meters
or kilometers. The reason is that the separation between objects in the night sky is
measured in angles, not distances, because objects in the night sky only seem to all
be located on a spherical shell around the Earth. In truth, the Moon is 384,000 km
away from Earth, and the Sun is 150,000,000 km away. So, during a solar eclipse,
the apparent separation in the sky between the Moon and Sun is almost zero, when
in reality, they are 149,616,000 km apart from each other in space! Luckily, we are
not worrying about how far they are from each other in space. We only need to learn
the system of angles, where opposite sides of the sky – like North and South, or
straight above and straight below – are 180◦ apart, and from the horizon to straight
62                                                             J. C. Holbrook, A. Baleisis




Fig. 8 Diagram of Cassiopeia and how to find Polaris
Source: Walker


above is 90◦ . This that lets us say that during a solar eclipse, the Moon and Sun
are 0◦ apart in the sky, and during a Full Moon, they are 180◦ apart in the sky. To
go from a point in the sky, all the way around the sky (in the largest circle you can
draw) is 360◦ . From one cardinal point to the next, for instance from North to East,
is 90◦ , as is from the horizon to the point directly above your head, the zenith.
    When looking along the horizon you also note the rising and setting position
of celestial bodies using angles. There is a convention of North as 0◦ , East as 90◦ ,
South as 180◦ , and West as 270◦ . Estimating the rising and setting positions using
this convention will make finding the same positions in Stellarium or HPLANET
easier.
    But what about smaller separations? There happens to be one observing tool that
most of us bring with us to any field site – our hands. It is a strange coincidence
of human anatomy that the angular size of a person’s hand, seen by them at arm’s
length is similar for most people. And there are rules of thumb, fist, and index finger,
that help with angular separation measurement. At arm’s length:

     Your fist =10◦
     Your thumb to pinky outstretched = 20◦
     The width of your index finger = 1◦
Naked-eye Astronomy for Cultural Astronomers                                       63




Fig. 9 Southern hemisphere constellations near the south celestial pole
Source: Chereau




   A good way to check this for your own hand is to compare your fist, outstretched
fingers and index finger to known angles on the sky. The distance between the two
stars that mark the end of the Big Dipper is about 5◦ on the sky, which should be
about half the width of your fist. The distance between the star Dubhe and Polaris,
the North Star, is about 30◦ , which should be the width of one outstretched hand
and a half. In the Southern Hemisphere, the long arm of the constellation Crux (the
Southern Cross) is about 6◦ across.
   Finally, the Moon is about 1/2◦ across, which is half the width of your index
finger, held at arm’s length. Testing this out at night is especially interesting when
there is a full Moon, because often it can look much larger in the sky when it is near
the horizon than when it is high in the night sky. Try to measure the angular size of
the full Moon close to the horizon and then a few hours later, when it is higher in
the sky. What do you find?
64                                                             J. C. Holbrook, A. Baleisis




Fig. 10 Finding Polaris and measuring apparent angles
Source: Chereau


Directions in the Sky
There is a related complexity about judging position in the night sky, and that comes
about when more than one person is looking up at an object. Try this at home – have
a friend stand a few feet away and point at something at the other side of the room.
You point at the same time. If you were to look where he/she is pointing, would you
be observing the same object? How can you remedy this? Standing very close to
the person is not always possible due to different customs and ideas about personal
space. One way you might get around this is to use a flashlight with a strong, very
straight light beam, try to locate an object you both agree on (like the Moon) and
have the person direct you from there verbally and with compass directions, such as
“the star I am looking at is 20◦ west of the Moon.”


The Sun
CAUTION: You can cause permanent damage to your eyes if you observe the Sun
incorrectly. Do not observe the Sun with your naked eye – always use a proper filter,
obtained from a trusted source such as a local planetarium. Sunglasses or eyeglasses
DO NOT provide enough protection to your eyes for looking directly at the Sun.
NEVER look at the Sun through binoculars or a telescope that hasn’t been profes-
sionally set up with a solar filter. Binoculars and telescopes do not just magnify an
image, they concentrate light, which makes them potentially very harmful if you
look through them when they are pointed at the Sun.
   A wonderful alternative to getting a solar filter is to look at a projected image of
the Sun. All this requires is a sheet of paper or cardboard with a pin hole in it. Use
a second sheet of paper or light surface to project the image onto. By adjusting the
distance between the two pieces of paper, you will adjust the size and focus of the
Naked-eye Astronomy for Cultural Astronomers                                          65

image of the Sun. During solar eclipses, this is especially interesting, because as the
Moon blocks out more of the Sun’s disk, the projected image will look like more of
a crescent. This technique works with any other medium that has small holes in it –
leaves on trees, or holes between the fibers of a straw hat.

The Apparent Annual Motion of the Sun
As the Earth spins on its axis, the Sun and stars seems to move across the sky. There
are many parts to this motion. The simplest one is that the Earth makes almost one
complete turn around its axis every 24 hours – one day. But the path the Sun makes
across the sky due to the Earth’s spin looks different depending where on your latitude
and what time of year it is. Where do you think the Sun will be tomorrow at noon if you
go out to look? (Make a prediction now, and then check your prediction tomorrow).
    Where you live is there a room that never gets sunlight? What direction do the
windows in those rooms face? Is there a room that gets sunlight only in the morning
or the evening? What direction do the windows in that room face?
    For observers in the Northern Hemisphere, the Sun travels an apparent a path
across the sky (remember, really the Earth is turning), that starts approximately in
the East, ends approximately in the West, and arcs towards the South. This means
that at local noon, even though the Sun is the highest it will be in the sky, and that it
is halfway between rising and setting, it is not directly above your head. In winter,
the path of the Sun is lower (reaches a lower maximum altitude above the southern
horizon) than in summer.
    In the Southern Hemisphere, the Sun still rises approximately in the East and sets
approximately in the West, but its path is tilted towards the North. Near the equator,
the direction of the Sun’s path will depend on the time of the year. Near the equator,
twice a year the Sun will pass directly overhead. Keep in mind, also, that winter in
the Northern Hemisphere is summer in the Southern Hemisphere.
    There are four important dates related to the Sun’s path through our sky, that
mark the beginning of Summer, Fall, Winter, and Spring. In the Northern Hemi-
sphere, they are summer solstice, near June 21st, autumnal equinox, near September
21st, winter solstice, near December 21st, and vernal equinox, near March 21st. The
summer solstice will be the longest day of the year, while the winter solstice is the
shortest. The date of summer solstice in the Northern Hemisphere corresponds to
winter solstice in the Southern Hemisphere. The equinoxes mark the days of the
year that have equal hours of day and night, and when the Sun rises exactly in the
East and sets exactly in the West, regardless of your latitude. There are many African
cultures that have aligned structures to the solstices or have ceremonies associated
with the solstices [10, 11, 12]. Cultural astronomy researchers should be sure to
include asking about the solstices and equinoxes during their fieldwork.

Solar Eclipses
The rising and setting of the Sun are everyday events, even if they are shrouded in
clouds or rain. But there are rarer events that involve the Sun, that are spectacular –
solar eclipses. We live in a very special time in our solar system’s history – the Moon
66                                                            J. C. Holbrook, A. Baleisis

orbits the Earth at just the right distance that it has about the same angular size in
the sky as does the Sun. A simpler way of saying this is that the Moon and the Sun
                            ◦
both appear to be about 1/2 across. This would not be a very remarkable fact except
that sometimes the Moon passes exactly between the Earth and the Sun and blocks
out the Sun completely – a total solar eclipse. Total solar eclipses only happen every
few years, are only visible for a maximum of 7 minutes (they can be as short as tens
of seconds), and only visible from a small number of places on Earth each time. A
map found at NASA Sun Earth Connection shows the path of recent and future solar
eclipses (Fig. 11). This map shows the shadow of the Moon as it moves across the
face of the Earth. A simple way to imagine this is to have a friend stand with you in
a sunny place, and have them block the Sun from their eyes with their fist – when
they say they can no longer see the Sun, you should see a shadow on their face, a
kind of solar eclipse. The difference is that since the Moon is outside the Earth’s
atmosphere (which scatters sunlight and makes the daytime sky bright), when the
Moon covers the Sun in a total solar eclipse, the sky gets very dark – like nighttime.
It is an unforgettable event to witness: the air gets colder, some stars and planets
may be visible, and even animals act differently during the short, unexpected night.
During the eclipse that was visible from Cape Coast, Ghana, during this meeting, one
college student who saw it broke into a smile after it was over saying “it was Wednes-
day before the eclipse, and I had an exam on Wednesday night, but since the Sun
set behind the Moon, it should now be Thursday and there should be no more exam.”




Fig. 11 Solar eclipses: 2001–2025 [13]
Naked-eye Astronomy for Cultural Astronomers                                           67

   There are times when the Moon is a bit farther from Earth, but still directly
between Earth and the Sun. When this happens, it is not large enough (in the sky) to
completely block the Sun, and an annular eclipse happens. The name refers to the
fact that the Sun’s rays show around the edges of the Moon in a ring, or annulus,
shape. Finally, at times the Moon is almost exactly between the Earth and the Sun,
and it will only cover part of the Sun’s disc, which is called a partial eclipse.


The Sun and the Constellations
One final point to make about the apparent motion of the Sun through the sky is
relevant to nighttime. As the Earth travels around the Sun throughout the year,
making one trip every 365 days or so, different stars are visible at night, and the
Sun appears to travel through different constellations. If the Sun were an important
character in the sky to cultures that noticed it, the constellations it went through
would also be significant. Can you guess which constellations these might be? They
are listed in many magazines and newspapers – the Zodiac constellations. Because
of the shape of our solar system (all of the planets orbit the Sun in a plane and the
Moon orbits Earth in approximately the same plane), the planets and the Moon also
move through the Zodiac constellations. So, the bright light you observe in Orion
or the Big Dipper or Crux, which are not Zodiac constellations, cannot be a planet,
it must be a star (or an airplane!). As mentioned, the standard constellations and
boundaries are set forth by the IAU. Because of this, there are 13 constellations that
the Sun travels through not twelve (Table 4).


Table 3 Major meteor showers for 2007 [24]
Shower         Activity Period Maximum          Radiant    Velocity r   ZHR Class Moon
                               Date     S. L.   R.A. Dec. km/s
Quadrantids    Jan 01–Jan 05   Jan 04   283◦ 16 15:20 +49◦ 41       2.1 120   I   15
  (QUA)
Lyrids (LYR)   Apr 16–Apr 25 Apr 22 032◦ 32 18:04 +34◦ 49           2.1 18    I   5
Eta Aquarids   Apr 19–May 28 May 06 045◦ 5      22:32 −01◦ 66       2.4 60    I   18
  (ETA)
Delta          Jul 12–Aug 19   Jul 28   125◦    22:36 −16◦ 41       3.2 20    I   12
  Aquarids
  (SDA)
Perseids       Jul 17–Aug 24   Aug 13 140◦      03:04 +58◦ 59       2.6 100   I   00
  (PER)
Orionids       Oct 02–Nov 07 Oct 21 208◦        06:20 +16◦ 66       2.5 23    I   9
  (ORI)
Puppid/Velids Dec 01–Dec 15 Dec 07 255◦         08:12 −45◦ 40       2.9 10    I   27
  (PUP)
Geminids       Dec 07–Dec 17 Dec 14 262◦ 2      07:28 +33◦ 35       2.6 120   I   5
  (GEM)
Ursids (URS) Dec 17–Dec 26 Dec 23 270◦ 7        14:28 +76◦ 33       3.0 10    I   13
68                                                                 J. C. Holbrook, A. Baleisis

               Table 4 The Path of the sun through the zodiac constellations
              Constellation                 Dates in Constellation (2007 CE).
              Aries                        April 19–May 13
              Taurus                       May 14–June 19
              Gemini                       June 20–July 20
              Cancer                       July 21–August 9
              Leo                          August 10–September 15
              Virgo                        September 16–October 30
              Libra                        October 31–November 22
              Scorpius                     November 23–November 29
              Ophiuchus                    November 30–December 17
              Sagittarius                  December 18–January 18
              Capricornus                  January 19–February 15
              Aquarius                     February 16–March 11
              Pisces                       March 12–April 18




The Moon
Phases of the Moon
When is the Moon in the sky and what does it look like? For some people, who have
spent a lifetime looking at the sky and noticing changes, this may be fairly easy to
answer. But for those of us who find ourselves surrounded by buildings or by many
cloudy nights, the answer may not be so obvious. The phases of the Moon are due
to the relative positions of the Earth, Moon and Sun. This means that the phase of
the Moon is directly related to how close it looks to the Sun in the sky.
    Simply reading the previous two sentences is not a good way to learn about Moon
phases, however. Over the course of a month, look for the Moon in the sky every
day, and note in a journal when you saw it and sketch how it looked. Be sure to look
for the Moon during the day, as well. At the end of your month, you should find that
you never saw a thin, crescent Moon high in the sky, and that a full Moon was not
visible during the day. There are names for the different phases of the Moon, and
they cycle over about 29 days. So if you have a Full Moon tonight (when the Moon
is in the opposite part of our sky from the Sun), in two weeks there will be a New
Moon (when the Moon is very close to the Sun in the sky, an thus not visible). In
between Full and New Moon are phases called Gibbous (more than half lit), Quarter
(half lit), and Crescent (less than half lit). For these in-between phases, there is also
added information about if they occur when the Moon is getting more (waxing) or
less (waning) lit on future nights.
    Figure 12 is an example of what you might see when you observe the Moon over
two weeks. From left to right, these represent what phase the Moon was in on March
15, 2007, March 23, March 25, and March 29. Keep in mind that the different phases
of the Moon will be up in the sky at different times.
Naked-eye Astronomy for Cultural Astronomers                                           69




Fig. 12 The phases of the moon.
Source: Chereau


Apparent Motion of the Moon
The Moon is in orbit around the Earth and it does appear to rotate around the Earth.
However, the Moon takes 28 days to complete one orbit around the Earth. The daily
motion is due to the Earth rotating on its axis, the same as with the apparent daily
motion of the Sun. To make things more complicated, the phases of the moon which
are determined by the angular distance between the Sun and the moon repeat after
29.5 days. This is because over the course of a “month” the Earth moves within its
own orbit taking the moon with it.
   The path the moon takes through the stars is close to the ecliptic which is the path
the Sun takes through the stars. The Moon stays within five degrees of the ecliptic.
But over a month it usually spends half the month above the ecliptic and half below
because of the tilt of its orbit around the Earth compared to the Earths orbit around
the Sun. Nonetheless, the Moon remains close enough to the ecliptic to pass through
the same constellations as the Sun (Table 4).



Metonic Cycle
The Moon appears in a particular location in the sky with a specific phase only
once every 19 years. Thus, a full moon near a particular star in Leo only occurs in
that exact same location and also as a full moon nineteen years later. Thus, far no
scholars have explored knowledge of the Metonic cycle among Africans except in
the literate cultures. In our society, nineteen years is close to when children become
legally adults and thus noting the Metonic cycle could have possible significance.
But, research on African adult initiation rites place initiation ages much younger,
between twelve and fifteen years old.



Lunar Eclipses
If a solar eclipse happens when the Moon blocks the Sun from reaching a part of the
Earth’s surface, what is a lunar eclipse? It is not very logically named – a lunar eclipse
happens when the Earth blocks the Sun from reaching a part of the Moon’s surface.
70                                                                  J. C. Holbrook, A. Baleisis




Fig. 13 Create a model of the Earth – Moon – Sun system. (Designed by A. Baleisis)


Because the Earth has to come between the Moon and the Sun, a lunar eclipse can only
happen during a Full Moon. Because it is safe to look at a Full Moon with the naked
eye, it is also safe to look at a lunar eclipse with the naked eye. As the Moon moves
into the Earth’s shadow, its surface will get darker – ranging from dark grey to a deep
red, depending on conditions in the Earth’s atmosphere. Also because of the Earth’s
atmosphere, its shadow does not make a sharp curve on the Moon. Lunar eclipses
Naked-eye Astronomy for Cultural Astronomers                                            71

occur more frequently than solar eclipses do, due to the fact that from the Moon, the
angular size of the Earth is much bigger than the angular size of the Sun – so it is easier
to get a lunar eclipse and they last longer (up to 3 hours). They take place one to two
times per year, and are visible by everyone for whom it is night.


Field Research
After learning the night sky at home, learning how to use the night sky software, and
armed with star charts and planisphere the researcher is prepared for field research.
Upon arriving at the research site, the researcher should begin learning the night
sky at that location. Ultimately, the research should be able to identify an object
that an informant points to. But, there are two techniques that are also helpful for
identifying stars and constellations in the field: photographing the night sky and
creating sketches of the night sky. But as a cultural astronomy researcher what are
you looking for? What are you trying to learn? Ruggles suggests three broad areas –
1. To document and analyze how people use the sky. 2. To learn how people perceive
and think about the sky. 3. To determine how competent people are at observing the
sky [14]. But, these skip an essential first step which is collecting the local names
for celestial bodies. Collecting myths and legends about celestial bodies compliment
learning the names. And, a new area of research for African cultural astronomy is
highlighted: to look at the interplay of light and shadows.


Data Collection Aids

Photography
Taking images of the night sky takes practice and patience. However, to take images
of the alignments of moon and sun rises and sets is easy and instantly offers concrete
proof that such alignments exist. For example if an informant says that a temple is
aligned such that sunlight enters the main door on the summer solstice. A researcher
should make an archaeological map of the temple with north indicated and using
accurate scale lengths and correct angles. Then, the direction of the temple main
door (using the latitude and longitude of the temple, plus the direction angle of the
door) can be checked using the astronomy software for the June 21st sunrise location
on the horizon. However, such confirmation is easier if on June 21st, the researcher
takes pictures from inside the temple facing the main door as the sun rises. The proof
is if the pictures capture the alignment. Such a process is the same for moonrises.
Both the sun and moon are bright and easy to photograph. Photographing the stars
is significantly more difficult.
    In order to take pictures of the night sky for reference is it useful to include
some of the horizon features. Thus, it is best to photograph target parts of the sky
while rising or setting. For example, to capture Orion in December in the northern
hemisphere, it is easiest to capture it when it rises a couple of hours after sunset.
72                                                            J. C. Holbrook, A. Baleisis

For taking images of the stars in addition a tripod and a cable release are needed in
addition to the camera. With digital cameras, a good image can be taking in about
40 seconds. For film cameras, it takes several minutes. The cable release allows the
researcher to take images without jostling the camera. Most cable releases can be
used with the open shutter function called “bulb.” The earth continues to rotate while
pictures are exposing, if longer exposures are necessary a clock drive tripod will be
needed. Having a clock drive tripod will prevent star trails because it compensates
for the earth’s rotation.
    Photographing daily life and people’s faces at your research site will provide
context for your research. You will use these photos in presentations, articles, and
books which will enable you to better convey what life is like for the people from
whom you are learning about the sky. Also, it is important to record what technology
is available at your field site and how such technology effects sky knowledge. For
example, is there lighting outside at night that may contribute to less stars being
visible? Or are printed calendars available that compete with the traditional sky
calendar. A picture of these will allow you to show these technologies to audiences.
    Photographing the night sky is difficult and requires a lot of equipment. As a
researcher, you may not want to take expensive equipment with you. Disposable
cameras can be substituted for more expensive ones for daytime photography, but
not for night photography. In certain countries, there are restrictions as to what kind
of information can be recorded and taken out of the country. Nonetheless, nights
of photographing the sky can be interspersed with nights working with informants
identifying objects. Doing both on the same night is usually not possible and makes
for a long night.


Sketching
When photographing the night sky is not an option, a sketch of the horizon, the
relative positions of stars and familiar constellations may be helpful. In some in-
stances, it may be easier to make a quick drawing than to set up camera equipment.
On a drawing, a researcher can label familiar stars and constellations and mark
unfamiliar ones for later identification. It is also useful to have informants make
sketches of what they are talking about. You may need to instruct the informant to
put in familiar horizon features. Such sketches may be useful for identifying stars
and constellations by comparing to a star chart or planisphere.


Data Content

Names
In order to begin to talk with local informants about the sky, you must learn basic
terminology such as the works for sky, star, moon, and sun. This is part of creat-
ing a common language for communicating with local informants. Other important
terms are the times of the day, seasons, months or moons, years, and the names
Naked-eye Astronomy for Cultural Astronomers                                        73

of individual celestial bodies and phenomenon. It is possible that a dictionary of
the local language contains many celestial terms, it is worth checking. But, terms
such as the names of individual planets and less bright stars are often not recorded.
Thus, cultural astronomy researchers often record names for celestial bodies for the
very first time. Creating a star chart of local names is equally significant. However,
recording the names is usually just the first step of more sophisticated cultural as-
tronomy research projects.


Myths and Legends
Oftentimes, people have myths or legends associated with celestial bodies. These
two should be recorded with the names of individual celestial bodies. Most people
have an accepted origin myth or cosmogony that may also be connected with the sky.
Sometimes, these myths and legends include factual information about the physical
properties of celestial bodies, or factual information about migration from one place
to another. The latter falls in ethnohistory. Other myths of powerful figures or elites
may claim a celestial origin or a connection to temporary celestial events such as
comets or eclipses [15, 16, 17, 18]. One area of naming and myths and legends that
is understudied is meteor showers [19]. Meteor showers occur when the Earth enters
the path of a comet. As comets travel the solar system, they leave behind bits of dust
and ice particles. It is these small particles that burn up in the Earth’s atmosphere
during meteor showers. There are five major meteor showers a year in the Northern
Hemisphere: The Lyrids, Perseids, Orionids, Geminids, and the Ursids. There are
four major Southern Hemisphere meteor showers and the Orionids can be seen in the
Southern Hemisphere as well. A researcher can strategically choose to do research
during a meteor shower or around another major celestial event such as a solstice or
eclipse. Researchers can ask about celestial events, but being there during a celestial
event can result in much deeper explanations and stimulate more recollections.

Light and Shadows
Cultural astronomy research in the United States has revealed that Native Americans
created petroglyphs in locations such that shadows and spears of light fell onto the
patterns only on certain days of the year. A film that shows the phenomena is “The
Sun Dagger” [20]. Thus far, no researcher has studied the combination of rock art
and light and shadow interactions in Africa. Given the extensive rock art sites in
East, South, and North Africa, there are plenty of places for researchers to begin
studying. The creation of such sites required much though about both the place-
ment of the glyph and the possible modification of surrounding rocks and earth
to create the desired pointing effect on specific days. The NASA Sun Earth Con-
nection provides resource on the web that shows the serpent shadow descending
along the central temple on the spring equinox in the Mayan town of Chichen Itza
in the Yucatan Pennisula, Mexico, among other light and shadow phenomena see
http://www.traditionsofthesun.org/ and http://sunearthday.nasa.gov/2005/index.htm.
The Sun Dagger is an example of a natural environment being modified for marking
74                                                                   J. C. Holbrook, A. Baleisis

a celestial event, while Chitchen Itza is an entirely built complex aligned for making
a celestial event. Examples of these types have not been explored in Africa.


Deeper Questions
After gathering the basics of names, myths and legends, usually a researcher moves
on to the core of their research. The core question is usually researcher specific.
Some projects have looked at navigation by the stars, architecture and alignments,
archaeological sites, rock art, contemporary tribal art, symbolism in literature, and
ritual. However, some standard issues should be a part of every study just like
learning celestial names, myths and legends. These include gender, acquisition and
transmission of sky knowledge, lost knowledge, and social status. Gender begins
with which celestial bodies are male, female, both or neither, to what do men or
women know about the sky and how they use the sky. For example, many women
around the world use the moon to keep track of their menses and fertility. Or when
are women or men initiation ceremonies. The acquisition and transmission of sky
knowledge answers the question of how people learn about the sky and who is being
taught about the sky and why. Lost knowledge reminds the researcher to ask about
what people think that their grandparents knew about the sky that they don’t know
now [21]. What is the social status of the people who know about the sky? Is certain
knowledge commonplace and other parts only known by a few elites or non-elites?
Is sky knowledge being used to maintain a social caste system [22, 23]?


Conclusions
This paper explores the naked-eye astronomy that needs to be mastered by cul-
tural astronomy researchers but includes field data collection methods and areas of
inquiry that should always be considered. To summarize, the cultural astronomy
researcher needs to know the constellations, many of the brightest stars, the Sun and
its annual apparent motion, the Moon and its phases, and how to measure angles in
the sky and along the horizon. Once in the field, a common language for discussing
the night sky needs to be established through learning the local names for celes-
tial bodies, angles, and the cardinal directions. Only then can deeper questions and
the core of the research project be approached. This paper should help the cultural
astronomy researcher, but ultimately each person should design their own unique
project with core issues to explore. Thus, this paper is not meant to be exhaustive in
scope but merely suggestive.


References
 1. Snedegar, K., “Ikhwezi”. Mercury, 1997: p. 13.
 2. Sky Publishing, Shop at Sky. 2007. www.shopastsky.com.
 3. Walker, J., Your Sky, in Fourmi Laboratory. http://www.fourmilab.ch/cgi-bin/Yoursky.
Naked-eye Astronomy for Cultural Astronomers                                                      75

 4.   Thalassoudis, K., www.skymaps.com. 2007. Star Charts. www.skymaps.com.
 5.   Sky Publishing, Sky & Telescope. 2007. skytonight.com.
 6.   Neata, E., The Night Sky This Week. 2007. Star Charts. www.nightskyinfo.com.
 7.   Walker, J., Home Planet: HPLANET. 2006. http://www.fourmilab.ch/homeplanet/.
 8.   Chereau, F., Stellarium 0.8.2. 2006. Software, Freeware. http://stellarium.sourceforge.net/.
 9.   British Astronomical Association, Educational Projects, in Campaign for Dark Skies. 2005.
      http://www.britastro.org/dark-skies/education.html.
10.   Malville, J.M., et al., Megaliths and Neolithic astronomy in southern Egypt. Nature, 1998.
      392(6675): pp. 488–491.
11.   Beidelman, T.O., Swazi Royal Ritual. Africa, 1966. 36: p. 373.
12.   Blier, S.P., The Anatomy of Architecture: Ontology and Metaphor in Batammaliba Architec-
      tural Expression. 1987, New York: Cambridge University Press.
13.   Espenak, F., Total Solar Eclipse Path: 2001–2025. 2002, National Aeronautics and Space Ad-
      ministration: Greenbelt, MD. http://sunearth.gsfc.nasa.gov/eclipse/SEatlas/SEatlas3/SE2001-
      25T-2.GIF.
14.   Ruggles, C.L.N., The Study of Cultural Astronomy, in Astronomies and Cultures,
      C.L.N.R.a.N.J. Saunders, Editor. 1993, Niwot, CO: University Press of Colorado. pp. 1–31.
15.   Roberts, A.F., Comets Importing Change of Times and States – Ephemerae and Process among
      the Tabwa of Zaire. American Ethnologist, 1982. 9(4): pp. 712–729.
16.   Henige, D.P., Reflections on Early Interlacustrine Chronology: An Essay in Source Criticism.
      Journal of African History, 1974. 15(1): pp. 27–46.
17.   Henige, D., “Day was of Sudden Turned into Night”: On the Use of Eclipses for Dating Oral
      History. Comparative Studies in Society and History, 1976. 18(4): pp. 476–501.
18.   Breutz, P.-L., Sotho-Tswana Celestial Concepts, in Ethnological publications. 52. 1969, Pre-
      toria: Department of Native Affairs. pp. 199–210.
19.   Lagercrantz, S., Traditional beliefs in Africa concerning meteors, comets, and shooting stars,
      in Festschrift fèur Ad. E. Jensen, E. Haberland, et al., Editors. 1964, K. Renner: Mèunchen,.
      p. 2 v. (xvi, 842 p.).
20.   Sofaer, A., The Sun dagger [videorecording], S. Project. and i. Bullfrog Films, Editors. 1983,
      c1982., Bullfrog Films,: Oley, PA.
21.   Holbrook, J.C., Celestial Navigation and Technological Change on Moce Island. 2002, The
      Max Planck Institute for the History of Science. p. 27.
22.   Jeffreys, M.D.W., The Divine Umundri Kings. Africa, 1935. 8(3): pp. 346–354.
23.   Jeffreys, M.D.W., The WInged Solar Disk or Ibo Itsi Facial Scarification, in Africa. 1951.
      pp. 93–111.
24.   American Meteor Society LTD, AMS Meteor Showers page. 2007. http://www.amsmeteors.
      org/showers.html.
Leadership

Shawna Holbrook




The first African cultural astronomy conference was held in Cape Coast Ghana in
March 2006. This event was scheduled to coincide with the first total solar eclipse
in Ghana since 1947. The intention was to highlight the importance of such astral
events for individuals, communities and cultures as well as bring international at-
tention to the fledgling field of cultural astronomy.
   “Cultural astronomy: the study of the use of astronomical knowledge, beliefs or theories to
   inspire, inform or influence social forms and ideologies, or any aspect of human behavior.
   Cultural astronomy also includes the modern disciplines of ethno astronomy and archeoas-
   tronomy.” (Campion 1997)

The organizer of the conference, Dr Jarita Holbrook, has spent several years focus-
ing on African cultural astronomy and saw a need to bring the few scholars in this
small field together to learn, exchange, and network. She also saw an opportunity
to collaborate with an African university to potentially develop a major in African
Cultural Astronomy in Africa.
   The fact that the organizers chose to have the conference in Ghana was an impor-
tant one. For the students and the scholars it brought the abstract study of a people
and a culture to life. Most of the participants who actively study the continent had
never traveled there. This gave them the opportunity to put flesh to theory, to bring
their academic knowledge and see how it fit into the reality of modern day Africa.
For the Ghanaians it showed them that there were some westerners who were trying
to do more than merely appropriate their art and culture.
   The location was not an easy choice, poor infrastructure, the lack of resources,
and an attitude by the local people that “all Americans have lots of dollars” cre-
ated obstacles that could have been easily avoided by having the conference in any
American city. The airfare and long travel time, a myriad of injections plus Malaria
Prophylaxis, the water and food precautions made this a trip neither for the faint
of heart nor the casual tourist. The group that committed to this conference was
looking for more than an experience of professional development, they were also
looking to immerse themselves in their field and expand their consciousness.


Shawna Holbrook
International Foundation for Education and Self-Help (IFESH), Benin


J. Holbrook et al. (eds.), African Cultural Astronomy – Current Archaeoastronomy
and Ethnoastronomy Research in Africa.     C Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2008          77
78                                                                         S. Holbrook

Premise
The conference had three major components. The first workshop series titled
“cultural Astronomy research” focused on the assessment and advancement of cul-
tural astronomy research in Africa. The second workshop series’, “future leaders
at the intersection of astronomy and culture in Africa”, goal was to “train students
in methods used on collecting data on the cultural astronomy of Africa”. The third
series of workshops looked at ways to integrate African Cultural Astronomy into
the classroom.
    The second workshop series was attended by students from the University of
Alabama Huntsville, The University of Arizona, The University of Cape Coast, The
University of Ghana-Legon, and the University of Nigeria. These students partici-
pated in workshops that focused on enhancing their knowledge of the field. These
included Cultural anthropology, African History, Geography of Africa, Archeoas-
tronomy and Naked-eye astronomy all presented by the leaders in the field. There
were many discussions about the field of African Cultural astronomy, where it was
headed and what role these students would play as researchers, leaders and profes-
sors. The students had many opportunities to talk to the experts about the practical
aspects of a future in this field of study. They networked with these experts and
gained invaluable contacts for their future.
    The final workshop in this series was on leadership. The premise of this workshop
was that the students needed more than information and academic ability to excel in
whatever field of study chosen. Most often as students we rarely look at the practical
things you need to do outside of the classroom to reach the top. The thought was to
have the students explore the idea of leadership from two perspectives:

1. leading a group (research team)
2. leading your field as a scholar


Practice

We started the session with introductions and had each person make a statement
about the eclipse that they had witnessed earlier in the week and their overall im-
pression of the conference. All of the students were deeply moved by the astral
event and thought that the conference was an amazing and innovative event. Many
were overwhelmed by the kindness of the Ghanaian people and the outpouring of
hospitality from strangers. We moved into a discussion about leadership. We started
off naming some of the great leaders in history and in the present day: Kofi Anon,
Robert Kennedy, Martin Luther King, Gandhi, Abraham Lincoln and Bill Gates
were some that came up repeatedly. It was then asked what these individuals had
in common. What characteristics did they share that made them leaders? This list
was put on the board and the students were asked to work in groups to come up
with a list of characteristics or qualities that defined a good leader. They were al-
lowed 20 minutes for this activity and there was much debate and enormous lists
Leadership                                                                          79

generated. Interestingly enough there was quite a lot of discrepancy between the
African perspective and the American perspective in the area of honest communica-
tion or directness. The Africans stressed diplomacy over straight-forwardness and
felt that the latter tactic was not always the most effective way to keep the group
cohesive and get the job done. It became evident that a leader shared many of the
same qualities but based on their culture there could be some significant differences.
It was brought up that in Japanese culture American directness is very abrasive and
that they tend not to argue. A good leader is one who reports the consensus of the
group and/or an elder/senior executive.
    In the end each group came to a consensus and reported their list. There was
much overlapping of characteristics with each group having at least 5 characteristics
found on the personality chart below.


Traits of a Good Leader
Compiled by the Santa Clara University and the Tom Peters Group:
r   Honesty - Display sincerity, integrity, and candor in all your actions. Deceptive
    behavior will not inspire trust.
r   Competent - Your actions should be based on reason and moral principles. Do
    not make decisions based on childlike emotional desires or feelings.
r   Forward-looking - Set goals and have a vision of the future. The vision must
    be owned throughout the organization. Effective leaders envision what they
    want and how to get it. They habitually pick priorities stemming from their basic
    values.
r   Inspiring - Display confidence in all that you do. By showing endurance in
    mental, physical, and spiritual stamina, you will inspire others to reach for new
    heights. Take charge when necessary.
r   Intelligent - Read, study, and seek challenging assignments.
r   Fair-minded - Show fair treatment to all people. Prejudice is the enemy of
    justice. Display empathy by being sensitive to the feelings, values, interests, and
    well-being of others.
r   Broad-minded - Seek out diversity.
r   Courageous - Have the perseverance to accomplish a goal, regardless of the
    seemingly insurmountable obstacles. Display a confident calmness when under
    stress.
r   Straightforward - Use sound judgment to make a good decision at the right
    time.
r   Imaginative - Make timely and appropriate changes in your thinking, plans,
    and methods. Show creativity by thinking of new and better goals, ideas, and
    solutions to problems. Be innovative!

Retreat Hell! We’ve just got here! – Attributed to several World War I Marine
Corps officers, Belleau Wood, June 1918. (Key ideal – take a stand)
80                                                                          S. Holbrook

    This list was then put on the board for the students to compare and discuss their
own findings. Most were satisfied but put certain characteristics at a higher priority
than others. Most students seemed to be aware of the basics of leadership but had not
applied it to themselves. We talked briefly about what would be demanded of them
as professors or scholars on a higher academic level and came to the realization that
leadership would be one of their primary task and would only grow more so as they
matured into their career. They would become the professors researchers and the
authorities in their field. Many felt ready for the challenge while others turned green
and queasy at the realization.
    The second part of this workshop looked at how to become a leader in your field.
Definitely the preceding characteristics play a significant role but there are also some
concrete steps to ensure success.
    First we spoke briefly about being a leader in a field. The students were asked to
list the things that you should do to be a leader in your field. Each student took five
minutes to compile their list then we put the ideas on a white board. The range of
responses was huge. Some responses were very specific and personal such as “estab-
lish a non-governmental agency to collaborate with Western countries to establish
a sister-school program”. To the very general, “Get good grades, study hard”. After
putting their ideas on the board we looked at the list generated by Dr. Holbrook:



How to be a Leading Scholar in Your Field
1. Read everything that has been printed on what you are interested in researching.
   Do your homework.
2. Go out and collect your data.
3. Analyze your data and write it up.
4. Publish your writings, present at conferences, write popular articles.


The participants found this list very precise and most of the things that they had
brainstormed fit under these categories. Yet, there was a significant amount of infor-
mation that did not belong to any of the presented headings and still needed to be
included. The students were put to the task of grouping this information and coming
up with additional categories.



How to be a Leading Scholar In Your Field (addendum)

5. Try to take your field in a new direction.
6. Bring a fresh, original perspective to the field. Originality is key.
7. Network. This requires good communication, persuasiveness, and confidence to
   develop contacts and key relationships that will assist in your career.
8. Mentoring. Find a food mentor that you work well with and that you trust.
Leadership                                                                                  81

The last one on the list caused some confusion and led to more discussion. Some
students were baffled by the concept of a “bad mentor”. Several students volun-
teered examples of mentors who had stolen/plagiarized their work or did not inform
them of scholarship or publishing opportunities. There were tales of mentors giving
preferential treatment to other mentees. There were also stories about mentors who
were just ineffective because of personal problems or personality incompatibility.
The opposition found it hard to believe that such things were possible. These were
the few who were lucky to have had good mentoring. Through their discussions it
was concluded that mentors were human and fallible and that students should re-
member this fact and not hesitate to find another mentor if they feel that their needs
are not being met. In choosing a mentor one should look for someone who is doing
what you want to do. A good mentor monitors the student’s academic progress,
meets frequently with the student to provide guidance and advise. A good mentoring
relationship may continue beyond the university door and into the workplace. Your
mentoring can evolve into a rich, lifelong relationship.


Conclusion
Overall the workshop was a nice break from the other lectures. There was more
interaction and the participants were asked to think about something different from
the rest of the conference proceedings. Though they may not have wholly agreed
with each other or the conclusions made they were presented with a blueprint for
guiding their career more than a doctrine. Each student left at least thinking about
leadership and how it applies to their life and career. The week in Ghana was full
of information and experiences that will be remembered for a lifetime. As we leave
Ghana exhausted and exhilarated lets just hope that this glow of inspiration will
sustain us until the next conference. Africa-2008?


References
Campion, N. (1997). “Editorial.” Culture and Cosmos. A Journal of the History of Astrology and
   Cultural Astronomy 1(1): 1–2.
Clark, D. (2004). Leadership, Character, and Traits. 2006.
Holbrook, J. C. (1998). African Astronomy. Archeoastronomy & Ethnoastronomy Newsletter On-
   line: 1–2.
Holbrook, J. C. (1998). “African Astronomy.” National Society of Black Physicists Annual Day of
   Scientific Lectures XXV: 79–81.
Holbrook, J. C. (2001). “African Calendars: An Examination of the Calendars of the Mursi of
   Ethiopia, the Batammaliba of Togo, and the Akan of Ghana.” National Society of Black Physi-
   cists Annual Day of Scientific Lectures: 3.
Holbrook, J. C. (2002). The Naming of Celestial Objects in African Astronomy: Part I, October
   21–October 27, 2002. Part II, October 28–November 3, 2002, Part III, November 4–November
   10, 2002. Louisiana Weekly. New Orleans: 2.
Holbrook, J. C. (2003). Introduction to African Astronomy. African folklore : an encyclopedia.
   P. M. Peek and K. Yankah. New York, Routledge.
82                                                                               S. Holbrook

Holbrook, J. C. (2005). African Astronomy, Traditional, Cultural, and Modern. Africana : the
   encyclopedia of the African and African American experience. A. Appiah and H. L. Gates.
   Oxford ; New York, Oxford University Press: v. cm.
Holbrook, J. C. (2006). Bamana Wetenschap: Hemelse Puzzelstukjes. Landbouwkampioenen
   Ciwara-Maskers Uit Mali (West Afrika). E. Kuhn. Uitgeverij, Museum Dorestad: 79–84.
Holbrook, J. C. (2006). Sun Gods and Moon Deities of Africa. Sky and Psyche: The Relationship
   Between Cosmos and Consciousness. N. Campion and P. Curry. Edinborough, Floris Books:
   157–168.
Integrating African Cultural Astronomy
into the Classroom

Sanlyn Buxner and Shawna Holbrook




Astronomy is the oldest science and from its inception it has been closely tied to
culture. The earliest humans were aware of the movements of the Sun, the phases of
the moon and the intermittent appearance of a variety of astral events such as meteor
showers and comets. They looked to the skies to track time, make calendars and plot
the seasons. They depended on this knowledge for agriculture, most obviously, but
also used it in religion, mythology, navigation, architecture, and art. Eclipses are
the most mysterious and dramatic of astral events, and they have inspired terror and
religious ecstasy. The sky played some role in the formation of every human culture
and is still playing an active part in everyday life. The science that looks at this
relationship between astronomy and culture is called “Cultural Astronomy.”
    In March of 2006, a group from The University of Arizona participated in a
unique conference to celebrate a total solar eclipse, and the astronomy and culture
of Africa: the Ghana Eclipse Conference in Cape Coast, Ghana. The Conference
was open to students, teachers, researchers, and anyone with an interest in African
culture and astronomy. The location in itself was an educational experience for many
who had never been to Africa. The conference attracted an eclectic hodgepodge
of people from a variety of backgrounds, ages and disciplines. From graduate stu-
dents to professors, artists to eclipse chasers, they gathered at this event to learn,
to exchange knowledge, and to network. The conference consisted of three major
parts that integrated together throughout the week for participants. The topics of the
scientific lectures ranged from solar astrophysics, integrating African culture into
American classrooms, specific African cultures and beliefs, and specific projects
related to ongoing research in the area of African cultural astronomy. This paper
describes the conference workshop – the teacher workshop – designed for teachers
to brainstorm and discuss how to bring their experience from the workshop into
K-12 classrooms in Africa, Canada, and the United States.
    The teacher’s workshop was one of the most innovative aspects of the confer-
ence. Many participants commented that they liked the idea of taking the specifics
of a conference and trying to develop a community based educational component.


Sanlyn Buxner
University of Arizona


J. Holbrook et al. (eds.), African Cultural Astronomy – Current Archaeoastronomy
and Ethnoastronomy Research in Africa.     C Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2008   83
84                                                                          S. Buxner, S. Holbrook

It shifted the conference from a strictly lecture platform to an activity that would
incorporate the new information and potentially disseminate it into the community.
It also allowed the participants to apply their expertise, work with a diverse group,
and produce something concrete.



Planning

The information about the workshop listed in the conference announcement for par-
ticipants was as follows:
     The conference will bring together K – 12 and higher education teachers from Africa, the
     United States, and the international community. The teacher workshop will commence after
     the eclipse and will include two days of discussions between teachers and expert researchers
     about the integration of African cultural astronomy information into classroom lessons.
     (http://www.ceao.arizona.edu/eclipse/, 2006)

   The astronomy education committee for the conference developed an agenda
and activities for up to 100 international teachers expected from mostly the United
States, Ghana, and Nigeria. The overall purpose of the workshop was to have teach-
ers develop ideas and/or lessons based on their interests and experiences at the con-
ference that they could take home to their classrooms and use with their students.
Each lesson would also incorporate aspects of both science and humanities within
the larger context of African cultural astronomy.
   The teachers were to work in groups based on the grade level they taught so
that they could focus on ideas that would be both relevant and accessible to their
students. Experience had shown that trying to make lessons for K-12 classrooms
usually results in lessons that do not meet the needs of any of the grade levels or
that meets the needs of only one age level but is too hard for younger and too easy
for older students. One idea that has been tried extensively is trying to scale lessons
for a broader range of ages using extensions for older students but even these are
done within the parameters of primary and secondary level classrooms. To address
this problem, the teachers were to break up into overall groups according to whether
they were teaching in a primary (K-6) or secondary (7–12) classroom. Eventually
these groups would break up into working groups for first and second grades, third
and fourth grades, fifth and sixth grades, seventh and eighth grades, ninth and tenth
grades, and eleventh and twelfth grades. Each group would ideally include at least
one science teacher and one humanities teacher as well as teachers from different
cultural backgrounds or from different countries.
   The resulting plan allowed larger group discussions about the conference that
would produce ideas on how to bring this information into the participants’ class-
rooms. Some possible topics for the teachers given the scheduled lectures were Igbo,
Muslim, South African, Benin, or Dogon peoples’ astronomy or archeoastronomy.
After collecting ideas from the first day, the intention was to distill the various ideas
into major themes or regional focus and have the teachers come back the next day to
sign up for the project they wanted to work on which would determine the working
Integrating African Cultural Astronomy into the Classroom                           85

groups for the second day. The goal of the second day was to create tangible and
usable lesson plans. In addition to creating lesson plans, teachers were to have access
to the African cultural astronomy experts that had been giving lectures throughout
the week. These experts were to be present the morning of the second day so that
the teachers could get more information and clarifications about their ideas.



The Workshop in Practice

The workshop began with an icebreaker where everyone introduced themselves,
talked about what they had found interesting about the conference so far, and talked
about what they wanted students to understand about their experience. Each per-
son included their interest in being at the workshop. The participant makeup of the
workshop was quite different than expected. On the first day those in attendance
included the three workshop facilitators, two female education graduate students
and one male science education faculty member who acted as the lead facilitator,
all from The University of Arizona, a male cultural anthropology doctoral candidate
from The University of Arizona that had experience with Native American cultural
astronomy and teaching at the university, a female African American pre-service
teacher working in Accra, a female African American retired school nurse, a female
African American science center administrator that specialized in hands-on educa-
tion for mostly African American students, a female African American health and
physics radiation specialist/ museum curator, a female African American teacher-
trainer working in Benin in a resource center, a male Ghanaian college student
that had 15 years experience teaching in a primary classroom in Ghana, and two
male Ghanaian physics students studying at the University of Cape Coast. Thus, the
workshop was dominated by African American women.
    The overall goal of the workshop given to the participants was to help students
understand the relationship between astronomy and culture in Africa. This goal was
a starting point and was open to change as the group saw fit. The teachers were
asked to consider creating lesson plans that could be used by teachers in America,
Africa, Europe, etc. In the initial discussion, many ideas were shared including
making sure the lessons had a practical aspect so that students would do something.
The teacher from Accra suggested that the lessons should be thematic and applica-
ble to specific grade levels. The anthropology student put forth the idea of having
long-term projects where students could track the movement of the stars and moon
incorporating many ideas including the skill of observation. The American museum
curator brought up the topic of some recent programs on African astronomy that had
been used in informal science centers in the United States including a planetarium
program called “African Skies” which gave folklore of the moon and stars which
helped generate interest for students to learn more about different cultures and as-
tronomy. The lead facilitator then asked the group to focus on what each person
found personally interesting from the conference. As each person shared their per-
sonal stories, it became apparent that the event of the eclipse was very meaningful
86                                                                   S. Buxner, S. Holbrook

to people, whether it was the actual occurrence or the social/cultural aspects that
accompanied it. People discussed the amazement of people around them during the
event that the eclipse had occurred. This local skepticism that the eclipse may not
happen reflected that there was a lot of skepticism among Africans about western
science in general. According to the Ghanaian students, once the eclipse happened
it gave the physics department more credibility with the students at the university
because of the powerfulness of the reality of the prediction. Before the eclipse there
was a lot of joking and mockery from people but once the eclipse had occurred
there was a shift in the mood as everyone was brought together in the shared and
humbling experience and there was the general feeling that this was a special event
for everyone who witnessed it. It was a shared experience around which something
could be built for students and communities. The discussion quickly turned to ways
to make this event meaningful beyond the morning of the actual eclipse for those
who had experienced it in the local area. One idea that came up was to make a
story book about the eclipse to help explain what happened. The museum curator
suggested that it would be interesting to find people who had seen the eclipse in
Ghana in 1947 and this year and compare their experience with 2006 experiences.
    From that idea came one about getting together different departments at the uni-
versity to make educational products, tying together the science department and the
art department to make a product commemorating the eclipse. The idea of collabora-
tion and interdisciplinary approaches is one that ran through the entire meeting. Not
only would it be “nice” but it is truly a necessity when working in an environment
with such a shortage of teaching resources.
    There were many concerns that were brought up around the development of ap-
propriate lesson plans. One concern raised by the anthropology student was that
studying other events in astronomy other than the Sun would be difficult because
it would require students to do things at night when they needed to be sleeping or
doing chores at home. The teacher from Accra explained to the group that most
Ghanaian students had many responsibilities at home and did not have time to focus
on school work at home. He raised additional concerns regarding science teaching in
Ghana: the lack of training for teachers, the fact that many primary teachers found
science difficult and shied away from teaching it in school and the severe lack of
material resources in most schools that would inhibit many lessons that required
any materials, including paper. Also brought up was the importance of developing
lessons locally for what students in Ghana had and not around western culture.
    This idea of developing something locally for local people started a conversation
about how this eclipse needed to be documented for the future. Also discussed was
the importance of getting local people interested in the eclipse and convincing them
that such events did affect their lives like it did for ancient people albeit for different
reasons. The group struggled with the idea of practicality versus personal meaning
of the eclipse as well as ways of sharing funds of knowledge with our children so
that this important event could be shared with future generations.
    Later that day, smaller groups talked about what the participants thought that
students needed to understand about astronomy and cultural astronomy. One group
consisted of the two education students from The University of Arizona, the teacher
Integrating African Cultural Astronomy into the Classroom                          87

from Accra, the teacher from Benin, and the science center administrator. The first
issue discussed was the national curriculum resource center. The curriculum of
Ghana is centralized and is reviewed every four years. In addition to the national
curriculum, teachers can also receive supplementary materials to use in their class-
rooms. The teacher from Accra discussed how some schools could visit labs but
many schools had to use what they had locally which was quite often not that much.
    The discussion turned again to the eclipse. Several ideas came up for actual les-
son plans in the process. The teacher from Benin suggested again connecting with
people who saw the eclipse in 1947 to understand their cultural reality as compared
to those that saw it this time. This would involve interviewing, and oral reporting to
the class or the creation of a comparison chart of 1947 and 2006, a newsletter format
was also suggested. The museum administrator suggested documenting the eclipse
for students that had viewed it was important so that they could build personal pride
and use it as a stepping stone for studying other aspects of astronomy. Documenting
could involve story telling or writing, theatre pieces/skits preformed by small groups
or developing a radio show using simple cassette recorders. A student from Arizona
discussed a possible science lesson around protecting your eyes from the Sun and
creating your own eclipse viewing devices. Also discussed was the different per-
ceptions of the eclipse; a cultural/religious aspect and a science aspect that cannot
be separated. The one thing that everyone could agree upon was that there was an
eclipse but that everyone had their own meaning for it. There was a meaning for
those who saw it and those who did not. From this we decided that one model for
an eclipse lesson would involve everyone agreeing that the eclipse had happened
and looking at the event from different perspectives; culture/religion, science, and
personal meaning.



Conferring with the Experts
Next, all the workshop participants came together with a panel of experts for a
rich roundtable discussion. The first question posed to the panel was about the
importance of cultural astronomy. The panel answers ranged from using cultural
astronomy as practical knowledge to help farmers and sustainable agriculture for
the present to a study in diversity that helped people understand other world views
and a good vehicle for making people aware of and sympathetic to other cultures.
One African scholar commented that the field was important for a revival of African
culture for African American students who want to understand their heritage. The
middle part of the discussion centered on the meaning of cultural astronomy for
the scholars and the participants. There seemed to be a general feeling that it was
important for everyone to understand it so that we could understand and appreciate
other cultures, their stores of knowledge, and their diverse ways of understanding
the universe. The last part of the discussion focused around how to link astronomy
and culture. The experts discussed how their field suffered from a lack of appropri-
ate words to describe what they did. It was suggested that the field could more
88                                                                S. Buxner, S. Holbrook

appropriately be called cultural cosmology to better describe how people orient
themselves to the cosmos. The whole group discussed how hard it could be to get
these ideas into classrooms. Currently there is not a place for cultural astronomy
in western classrooms and this is an issue that needs to be explored more by the
community. It was concluded that cultural astronomy was an appropriate tool in the
classroom and a mode of transmission that creates a context for the transmission of
sky science.
   The first day ended filled with ideas for what could be accomplished. There
seemed to be three major themes that came out of the discussion. The first was
that the eclipse was an amazing event that needed to be described and shared. The
group wanted to make sure that what came out of the workshop would help share
something about the experience of the eclipse with students, whether it was for
cultural, historical, scientific, or personal reasons. The second theme to emerge was
that astronomical events could be used to bring people together and could be used as
a vehicle to examine cultural values. The third theme that emerged what that events
such as eclipses or moon phases could be understood in different ways and that they
could be used as an avenue for various routes of understanding including history,
culture and science.



Developing Working Ideas for Lesson Plans
The participants for the second day of the workshop were slightly different than the
first day. The four members from The University of Arizona, the museum adminis-
trator, the museum curator, the teacher from Benin, the Ghanaian physics students,
and the Ghanaian student/teacher remained. The teacher from Accra was not able to
come on the second day but we gained a female western educated teacher who ran
the physics outreach program at the University of Cape Coast and a male western
educated male who worked in Ghana, both African American.
    After reviewing the events of the previous day and introducing the new partici-
pants, the discussion turned to the reflections on the previous day’s work. There was
still concern about the relevance of cultural astronomy for students and whether any
of it was part of a fundamental knowledge. One of the experts joined us for the first
part of the morning and discussed how the study of cultural astronomy for local
students would help raise awareness about their own culture and their own cultural
development.
    A few more local issues were discussed as a large group. Despite the local skepti-
cism about science, it is something that is in the consciousness and day to day reality
of students, in both positive ways (cell phones) and negative ways (war technology).
In addition science has practical applications like the prediction of tides. One power-
ful way to link to the past was to look at how people used science in the past and how
science is used presently. One more concern brought up by the anthropology student
was pointing out that cultural astronomy is rooted in the language and culture of a
place and that those must be preserved. He felt that one way to destroy local culture
Integrating African Cultural Astronomy into the Classroom                          89

was to talk about the universality of the sky for people and that this way of thinking
would destroy cultural diversity.
    After much discussion the group was given the task for the day which was to
outline what the students would do during an experience to understand something
about the topic based on work from the previous day. The three themes from the
previous day were presented as starting points to make groups so that one group
would work on using the eclipse as a way to understand different disciplines such
as science, one group to talk about ways to make the eclipse meaningful for local
people, and one group to talk about the idea of using astronomical events as ways
to celebrate culture.
    In the small group tasked with making a science lesson, the conversation di-
gressed to concerns about the difficulties of making lessons that would reproduce
the power structure of the west. Caution was urged because the project was being
carried out by The University of Arizona and was a middle class Anglo endeavor.
The University of Cape Coast teacher shared some additional concerns. She sug-
gested that we should have taken tours of schools in Ghana to better understand
them and to understand our own cultural assumptions about what schools would
look like as opposed to what they do look like. We might be shocked to see, she felt,
that instead of talking about making students sky literate they should be generally
literate. She concluded that we had gone about it in the wrong way, that there was
no way to make something to take away from the experience in a lesson form.
She admonished that we should be getting grants for resources and use the local
community to help us create lessons. As a result of this line of reasoning, the group
further digressed focusing on education in Ghana and cross-cultural collaborations
rather than on completing the assigned task. It is interesting to note that this group
was the one that the facilitators thought would come up with a lesson plan. Through
the interactions of the members, we became very concerned with making a product
that was locally relevant and making sure that there were recommendations in place
for future work.
    The second group was to come up with ways to document and share the expe-
rience of the eclipse with local people. One of the major ideas that came out of
this session was to have students collect and share experiences of the eclipse. One
piece of this would be to interview people that saw the eclipse, an elder, a parent,
and a peer, and have students report to the class about what they found out. Other
topics for discussion for students would have been “what if I had stayed inside
for the eclipse?” or “what is the meaning of the eclipse for the future?” Students
could also interview people who had seen the eclipse in 1947 or both eclipses and
have a discussion about what they thought and how Ghana had changed in the past
50 years. One question that could be posed to a class for research and discussion
was how Ghana is different than it was during the last eclipse and how will Ghana
be different in 30 years when the next eclipse comes? These parts of the activity
would be best used with students in grades six and above. All students, including
younger students, could do theater activities or create stories about where they were
during the eclipse. Another idea would be to make a collage of pictures, news-
paper articles, and perhaps even a simple pinhole camera that could be used to
90                                                              S. Buxner, S. Holbrook

see the Sun on a continual basis. A second major idea that came out was to have
students create their own poems, stories, or pictures of the eclipse. One concern
again was the lack of resources in most classrooms. Another idea that was shared
with the group is the use of kinesthetic astronomy to demonstrate to students how
eclipses occur with the alignment of the Sun, Moon, and Earth by having the stu-
dents play the role of different objects in the system. This was actually used by
The University of Arizona team during the eclipse when they were talking to local
college students about why the eclipse could only be seen certain places on the
earth. This is something that the team also uses in elementary school classrooms
in the United States to explain similar concepts. Overall, it seemed important to
this group that the eclipse be documented so that there would be more resources of
knowledge for the next eclipse. This would help students make meaning of their
own experience and give them more local history to build on with their shared
experience.
    This group was thought of by the facilitators to be the group that would work on
an activity for those who saw the eclipse and respect that it was a valuable outcome
as well. Interestingly enough, there were many ideas that came out of this group that
were very appropriate to use as lessons in classrooms both in the Unites States and
possibly in Ghana.
    The third small group was to talk about cultural events that occurred around
astronomical events. This group wanted to make a lesson that could be used in
Ghana and be used as an example for other locations. They started out trying to
understand the nature of local celebrations of astronomical events. They were un-
able to come up with this information, even from the University library. The focus
on the lesson turned to having a classroom make its own festival centered on an
astronomical event. As the lesson was developed, the group was concerned about
doing it incorrectly or in a way that would be offensive. Within the lesson, the
students would choose an astronomical event to celebrate, they would name their
festival, would choose food for the event, choose dances to perform, would develop
rituals, develop costumes, and a procession for the event. In creating their event
they would need to learn about either local or other cultures and their celebrations.
One thing that the man working in Ghana considered important was finding some
commonalities in the celebration of festivals.



Dissemination Issues
The first group in discussing their assigned topic quickly realized that making
lessons to use in Africa would be totally different than making lessons for students
in the United States. One thing that was brought up was that for Africa we would
need to build a curriculum for students from 3 years old to 80 years old, in the same
way that a science center works, so that students would get interested in a topic
and want to know more. It was cautioned that you could not make any assumptions
about what goes on in classrooms in Ghana, that many people had gone back to
Integrating African Cultural Astronomy into the Classroom                             91

school and that you can have a sixty year old student in a sixth grade classroom,
many classrooms have as many as a hundred students, and that corporal punishment
is commonplace in classrooms. Lack of resources is a constant problem in African
classrooms. Using kits and sending them to schools in the local area as a way of
sharing resources was suggested. Kits are basically a set of resources needed to
support the lesson. This may include paper, scissors, crayons, as well as instructions
on how to make learning materials from local resources and is sent from school to
school. Other ideas about dissemination included sending curriculum and materials
to teachers training colleges, IFESH, the Peace Corps, posting them on the internet,
and as well as putting them into kits that could be circulated among rural schools.
The collaboration with other Non-governmental agencies would be a great source
of funds, resources, and expertise.
    Overall, the model for what a lesson would look like would be a single piece of paper
with background for the teacher on one side and perhaps images to copy on the other
side. There would not be a prescribed lesson but rather background reading, a menu
of ideas for a teacher to choose from, and some pedagogical information about how
to do the activities. One concern was making the activity adaptable to each individual
classroom and making so it could be a local product for those who used it.
    At the end of the workshop, each group reported on what they had worked on
and produced. One final concern brought up was to make sure that anything sent to
Ghana was checked up on for feedback so that those creating lessons could see if
the lessons were being effective. It was agreed that any educational work needed to
be a two-way street so that information flowed both ways.


Reflection
The original planning for the workshop intended it to have two outcomes: something
that the teachers could take home with them to use in their classroom and a set of
lessons to use in classrooms in multiple countries. Each participant took something
important with them from the workshop even if it was not a tangible lesson. Primarily
they took away a greater awareness of doing work in a culture that is not your own,
whether it is in Africa or the United States. It became evident that it is important to
work with local experts to make educational material that is relevant to the classrooms
it is intended for. During the two days, there were varying degrees of awareness and
personal reflections and growth that showed that participants were sharing ideas and
struggling with issues that are the basis of cultural astronomy and the many issues
that are embedded within it. One such example occurred on the first day when we
were discussing making lessons about this eclipse for students outside of Ghana. The
museum administrator was brainstorming ways to create lessons about the eclipse
embedded with local Ghana cultural astronomy for use with students in North America
for the next eclipse. As she was talking and thinking, it occurred to her that using
lessons from Africa would not be as relevant as having students discover the cultures
of their own area, in this case, of the Native Americans who have their own stores of
cultural and astronomical knowledge. We witnessed her realization that each group
92                                                                     S. Buxner, S. Holbrook




Fig. 1 Sanlyn Buxner and Sulemana Nuhu during the educator workshop. Picture by A. Baleisis


of people needed to rely on the expertise of their area, their ancestors, and those who
added considerable culture to modern society.
   The goal of coming up with lessons to publish for use in multiple countries had
a few roadblocks. One of the concerns that came up in all three groups was mak-
ing materials that would either be locally useful or appropriate for classrooms in
Ghana. Suggestions included visiting Ghana schools and working with local teach-
ers/experts. These suggestions reinforced our idea that using a mixture of teachers
from different cultures can be productive and gave us further reason to recruit local
teachers for future workshops. Other roadblocks included an overall lack of time
to come up with a finished product. Despite these roadblocks, there are some very




Fig. 2 Sanlyn Buxner and Audra Baleisis during the workshop. Picture by M. Peña
Integrating African Cultural Astronomy into the Classroom                         93




Fig. 3 Workshop participant Olanrewaju Oyewole. Picture by M. Peña


relevant and useful ideas that came out of the working groups, both in ideas about
how to go about making lessons as well as ideas that can be made into lessons for
students at least in the United States.
   Another important part of the workshop was the roundtable discussion with the
teachers and the experts. This discussion gave an opportunity for teachers to ask
the experts directly about their opinions of the field and gave the experts a chance
to share their thoughts on education. Despite the fact that the expert panel was not
asked specific questions about what they researched, this discussion was an impor-
tant one for people to share their global perspectives on the fields of education and
cultural astronomy. This discussion helped to clarify why we as a society should
study cultural astronomy and how it helps us all make sense and personal meaning
of our own lives.
   Overall, the workshop was a fascinating experience where a variety of opinions
and intellectual resources were shared and collected. Despite the fact that we did
not have the makeup of teachers that we had expected, the two days were incredibly
rewarding and reinforced the need and value of these types of experiences. It can
be said that each participant came away with a new perspective and fresh ideas that
will be applied to their professional and personal lives.
A Contemporary Approach to Teaching Eclipses

Timothy F. Slater




Introduction – Importance of Eclipses in Students’ Education

Although no “world-wide” standards of science education actually exist, one might
argue that if such a document did exist, the nature and predictable movement of
objects in the heavens would be a component of it. In the USA, one of the guiding
curriculum documents for science education, the National Science Education Stan-
dards (which surprisingly are not required to be adopted across the USA as a federal
mandate) state that all students should understand, amongst many other ideas, that
(i) objects in the sky have patterns of movement. The sun, for example, appears to
move across the sky in the same way every day, but its path changes slowly over the
seasons. The moon moves across the sky on a daily basis much like the sun. The
observable shape of the moon changes from day to day in a cycle that lasts about
a month and (ii) most objects in the solar systems are in regular and predictable
motion. Those motions explain such phenomena as the day, the year, phases of the
moon, and eclipses (Adams and Slater, 2000).
    Also in the USA, another guiding document for national guidelines for curriculum
(similarly not required for adoption federally), the American Association for the Ad-
vancement of Science’s Benchmarks for Science Literacy state that all students should
understand that “our Sun can be seen only in the daytime, but the moon can be seen
sometimes at night and sometimes during the day. All sky objects appear to move
slowly across the sky. The moon looks a little different every day, but looks the same
again about every four weeks.” Some readers might be surprised that the Benchmarks
also state that “no particular educational value comes from memorizing sky object
names or counting stars, although some students will enjoy doing so” (Slater, 2000).
    Clearly, from the above, as well as from some sense of the nature of what com-
poses an “educated” person, the nature of objects in the sky is a worthy topic for
education. But, what about requiring that students learn about the nature of eclipses
of our Sun by the Moon? Do these events, dramatic and spellbinding as they are,


Timothy F. Slater
University of Arizona, 933 N. Cherry Ave., Tucson, AZ 85721 USA
Telephone: (520)621–7096; Fax: (520)621–1532


J. Holbrook et al. (eds.), African Cultural Astronomy – Current Archaeoastronomy
and Ethnoastronomy Research in Africa.     C Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2008   95
96                                                                            T. F. Slater

merit inclusion in teaching when they can only be observed at a particular location
under clear skies on time scales on the order of decades? I would argue that the an-
swer is yes. First of all, from a historical perspective, the phenomena of eclipses have
reportedly changed the course of human events. Second, with the advent of modern
technology such as live TV and Internet broadcasting, each time these events are ob-
served somewhere in the world, they are often broadcast to all reaches of the world.
But, perhaps most importantly, when these events do occur, they are often events
so dramatic and revered by those observing them, that they serve as cornerstones of
life’s memories for the individuals that experience them. The Ghana Eclipse Confer-
ence focused on the Cultural Astronomy of Africans offered an opportunity to view
a total solar eclipse. Part of the conference was a workshop for K12 educators to
develop lesson plans about African Cultural Astronomy. As a clear example of the
impact of viewing this celestial event, all the groups decided to focus their lesson
plans on the total solar eclipse. As such, I propose that eclipses should definitely be
included as at least a small part of every child’s curriculum.
    This paper provides a history of the research surrounding students’ learning as-
tronomy and in particular about the predictable motion of objects in the heavens. In
order for students to fully understand eclipses, students first need to have a scientif-
ically accurate understanding of the size and scale of the Earth-Sun-Moon system,
then need to have a functional understanding of what causes moon phases, and then,
and only then, are students in a position to fully understand the nature of eclipses.



First Steps Toward Understanding Student Reasoning Difficulties
and Incorrect Beliefs in Astronomy
The idea that astronomy students actively synthesize and interpret information and
experiences into conceptual models that may or may not be scientifically accurate
is rooted in the educational reforms known as constructivism (Slater, 1993). This
student model-building paradigm has motivated and guided the nature and empha-
sis of a variety of investigations into student understanding. Certainly the most well
known study of understanding in astronomy was publicized by Philip Sadler and is
presented in the video A Private Universe (Schneps, 1989). The video begins with
clips of interviews with several alumni, faculty, and graduating seniors from Har-
vard University. Of the 23 individuals interviewed, 21 could not give a scientifically
acceptable explanation for the cause of the seasons or the phases of the Moon. An
explanation for the cause of the seasons that is consistent with a scientifically accu-
rate viewpoint would involve how the amount of sunlight reaching Earth’s surface
at different latitudes is related to the planet’s tilt. However, the most common alter-
native explanation given was the changing distance between the Sun and Earth (that
Earth is closer to the Sun in the summer and farther in the winter). A scientifically
accurate description of the lunar phases would explain that, despite half of the Moon
being illuminated by the Sun at all times, the portion of that half that can be seen
from Earth – what we call the phase – depends upon the relative positions of the Sun,
A Contemporary Approach to Teaching Eclipses                                        97

Earth, and Moon. Responders most often incorrectly explained lunar phases by an
“eclipse” or “interference” model, where shadows cast by Earth onto the Moon or
clouds block some of the light. In addition to members of the targeted Harvard com-
munity, local ninth grade students were interviewed about these same concepts. The
video shows lengthy portions of one student’s interview and related commentary by
her teacher. Heather, the student, gave detailed explanations and illustrations of her
ideas about these concepts. Although she often used terminology that would imply
complete understanding, further probing through an interview showed that this was
not the case. Heather had deeply-held alternative conceptions before instruction and,
after instruction, integrated newly learned information into these incorrect ideas in
complex and subtle ways.
    Although the ideas so clearly illustrated by A Private Universe were garnered
through methods that probably do not conform to the rules of reliability and va-
lidity that define educational research, the video’s influence cannot be understated.
Modeled after this presentation, similar videos exposing the robustness of students’
individual ideas about the natural world have been created and distributed in the
areas of simple electric circuits, photosynthesis, and geometric optics. These videos
are widely used to help teachers and faculty understand the nature of learning.
    Not nearly as well known, but more reflective of quantitative research on student
understanding, is a multiple-choice instrument, developed by Sadler (1992) as part
of his dissertation work, that addresses misconceptions culled from the literature
and his interviews with students. Sadler administered the instrument to over 1,400
high school students and found a mean student score of 34% correct. In fact, Sadler
found that many misconceptions (19 of 51) were actually preferred by students over
the scientifically accurate concepts.
    In addition to motivating much of the contemporary effort in astronomy teaching
a particular strength of Sadler’s work was that it lead to the development of the
Project STAR curriculum materials (Gregory, Luzader & Coyle, 1995), initiated the
widespread use of an inflatable and portable planetarium (called STARLAB), and
served as the foundation for much of the activities of Project SPICA (Ball, Coyle,
& Shapiro, 1994).



Misconceptions About Size and Scale as a Barrier
to Teaching Eclipses

One might guess that if students are to understand eclipses, they need to have an
underlying idea of the size and scale of the Earth-Sun-Moon system. Unfortunately,
students’ pre-existing ideas about the size and scale are well poised to interfere with
the most well articulated lectures about eclipses. Most students are quite surprised to
learn that the Moon is only one-quarter Earth’s diameter and even more surprised to
learn that the Moon orbits Earth at an orbital radius of about thirty Earth diameters!
   Fanetti (2001) interviewed 50 college students and administered an open-ended
survey to more than 700 students to investigate their understanding of lunar phases.
98                                                                          T. F. Slater

Her main conclusion from these data is that a lack of understanding of the Moon-
Earth system’s scale is the main reason for student difficulties in understanding the
phases of the Moon. Earlier work by Callison and Wright (1993, April) investi-
gated the use of different three-dimensional models to teach about lunar phases,
focusing especially on the interaction of the students’ spatial ability and reason-
ing levels in their ability to develop mental models. Barnett and Morran (2002)
investigated the use of project-based curriculum from the Challenger Center (URL:
http://www.challenger.org) in a 5th grade classroom to teach about the phases of the
Moon and eclipses. They incorporated findings from research into student under-
standing by the sequencing of projects, with the report focusing only on the final two
projects (covering the relative Earth-Moon-Sun positions and eclipses). Students
had opportunities to research information about the orbital motions of the Moon and
Earth, as well as to explore an interactive computer model that displayed the Earth-
Moon-Sun system from different three-dimensional perspectives. The researchers
found that their students were able to increase their understanding of Moon phases
(as defined by having a more scientifically complete understanding) after having
experienced this series of lessons.



Misconceptions of Moon Phases Serve as a Barrier
to Teaching Eclipses
The deep-seated prevalence of misconceptions about the moon mentioned earlier
and demonstrated by A Private Universe are not limited to Sadler’s work. The
overarching misconceptions are grounded in the notion that the changing phases
of the Moon must be caused by something being in the way – the Earth’s shadow or
clouds, for instance. Stahly, Krockover, and Shepardson (1999) furthered research
on students’ understanding of the changing lunar phases. In their review of the
literature, the authors report that previous studies had been mainly quantitative in
nature (using questionnaires or multiple-choice surveys), and thus they adopted
a qualitative, case-study approach and interviewed four U.S. third-grade students.
Additional data were collected in the form of written tasks, classroom observations,
and teacher feedback. Comparisons between pre- and post-instruction interviews
demonstrated that the students showed a positive conceptual change over an in-
struction intervention characterized as a three-week, multiple component lesson us-
ing three-dimensional models, with post-instructional explanations showing more
details and more scientifically accurate ideas.
    For older students, Lindell (2001) developed the Lunar Phases Concept Inven-
tory (LPCI) from interviews with undergraduate students to measure conceptual
change in their understanding of the Moon’s phases. Her pretest results confirmed
earlier work with younger students and argued that scientifically inaccurate ideas
persist into college. The LPCI, a multiple-choice instrument that can be quantita-
tively analyzed, was used to evaluate the effectiveness of an in-class group activity
designed to address these concepts using a constructivist approach. The activity
A Contemporary Approach to Teaching Eclipses                                         99

showed statistical success in the way of an unusually large average gain (g = 0.63),
where gain is defined as the ratio of the student’s actual increased score to the
greatest possible increased score. Lindell and Olsen (2002, August) describe fur-
ther revision, field-testing, and statistical analysis of the LPCI. More recently, brief
Socratic-basic tutorial activities (Adams, Prather, & Slater, 2002) resulted in even
larger gains when coupled with interactive lecture techniques (Slater et al., 2006).
    Trundle, R. K. Atwood, and Christopher recently investigated the understand-
ing of moon phases held by pre-service elementary teachers (Trundle, Atwood, &
Christopher, 2002) and in their report provide a table describing the results of many
previous studies on this topic. The researchers collected qualitative data through
classroom observation, structured interviews, and document analysis. This triangu-
lation of data through multiple sources is a useful and increasingly common way of
checking for valid interpretations. A total of 78 participants were interviewed once
or twice to determine their mental models; 63 received inquiry-based instruction
on lunar phases during a physics course, while the 15 methods course students re-
ceived no instruction on the topic. As in most of the earlier studies on this topic, the
most common alternative conception about the lunar phases is that they result from
eclipses by Earth’s shadow. Post-instruction interviews showed that 76% of partic-
ipants demonstrated scientific understanding after the inquiry unit. A later report
(Trundle, Atwood, & Christopher, 2003, March) describes the results of additional
post-instruction interviews, 6 and 13 months after the instructional period, with a
subset of 12 of the participants receiving instruction in the physics course. None
of this subset had scientific understanding before instruction. Three weeks after
instruction, eight showed scientific understanding and four demonstrated scientific
fragments (in which the participant demonstrated knowledge of some but not all
of the four components deemed necessary for complete scientific understanding).
Either 6 or 13 months after instruction, seven still held scientific understanding and
two demonstrated scientific fragments. The other three reverted to alternative con-
ceptions. The researchers also specified that two common problems seen in the pre-
instruction interviews were that the participants often did not know that the Moon
orbits Earth, or that the Moon is always half illuminated. Without this knowledge,
the researchers speculate, students have no reason to question the common shadow
eclipse model. The researchers did not use the LPCI (Lindell, 2001) to further inves-
tigate their participants’ understanding, perhaps because of the LPCI’s still limited
dissemination.
    Abell and colleagues used a six-week long Moon observation project in their
elementary science teaching methods course to emphasize aspects of the nature of
science as well as content (Abell, Martini, & George, 2001). The details of the goals,
methods, and assessments used in this process are described in a later report (Abell,
George, & Martini, 2002). Students recorded daily Moon observations in journals,
eventually moving to identifying patterns, making predictions, and offering expla-
nations in the journals as well. While students were able to recognize the importance
of observation in science, they were not often able to articulate the different roles
observation can play. Students were encouraged to develop their own theories to ex-
plain their observations; however, few students transferred this aspect of “invention”
100                                                                          T. F. Slater

to a scientist’s work. Finally, both small- and large-group discussions were used to
emphasize the social nature of science. Most of the students recognized the impor-
tance of social collaboration in their own learning process, but again failed to make
the connection between this aspect and the work of scientists. The authors recognize
that much of their instruction about the nature of science was more implicit than
they perhaps had hoped, and plan to make these aspects more explicit in future
instruction.



Instructional Strategies to Circumvent Student Difficulties
with Moon Phases

Given the extensive nature of research on student difficulties with moon phases,
one might mistakenly assume that all teachers and professors are aware of these
issues and successfully help students overcome their misconceptions. However, the
more common experience among astronomy educators is that well implemented
astronomy instruction on moon phases is lacking far too often. Regardless, some
very good models exist.
    Classic approaches are eloquently described by Pompea (2000) that are time
tested and include using models. Some other ideas, worthy of note, include
Hickman’s (1993) description of a kinesthetic learning approach to teaching moon
phases popularly known as “the moon dance” (Slater & Zeilik, 2003). This has
gained significant popularity in the USA and has been extended considerably by
Morrow (2000) as part of a series of lessons known as Sky Time.
    Adams and Slater (2000) designed a collaborative learning lesson that used a
heliocentric perspective for teaching moon phases. This asked students to draw stick
figures on a circle that represented Earth and first asked students to indicate where a
stick figure would be placed at different times of the day on a spinning Earth. They
then scaffolded this idea to how a moon that is always one half lit by the Sun would
be viewed from Earth at different times of the day and to the month.
    Although most of these efforts described above are not fully evaluated, some do
have compelling data as to their effectiveness. Sneider and Ohadi (1998) designed
a study to judge the effectiveness of an elementary level instructional unit called
Earth, Moon, and Stars (Sneider, as cited in Sneider & Ohadi), developed by the
Lawrence Hall of Science as part of the Great Expectations in Math and Science
(GEMS) series. The Earth, Moon and Stars GEMS unit of six activities is designed
with constructivist and historical approaches in mind and is aimed at grades four
through eight. Using the instrument described in Sneider and Pulos (1983), inves-
tigators tested the efficacy of the unit through an experimental-control two-group
study design. They found that students in the experimental course who used the
GEMS unit scored higher on the instrument than those who were exposed to tradi-
tional instruction only. Analyses such as Chi-squared tests found that the differences
were statistically significant and allowed the researchers to eliminate maturation and
pre-test learning effects as explanations for the increased scores.
A Contemporary Approach to Teaching Eclipses                                        101

Fig. 1 K12 educators: Doris
Anderson and Betty Turner




   Probably the most successful approach that has been fully evaluated are efforts
by Prather (Prather, Slater, Adams, Jones, & Dostal, 2004). This team designed an
approach called Lecture-Tutorials for Introductory Astronomy (Adams, Prather, &
Slater, 2005). In this approach, implementing the Lecture-Tutorials ideally consists
of three steps. The first step is to pose a set of conceptually challenging questions –
presented to students at the end of an abbreviated lecture on a given topic – to elicit
and challenge students’ fundamental understanding. If an unsatisfactory percentage of
students are able to correctly answer the questions, this suggests that the accompanying
Lecture-Tutorial should be used. What will be surprising to most faculty is that, even
after conventional instruction, the majority of students will still answer seemingly
“easy” questions incorrectly (Hewson & Hewson, 1988; Mazur, 1996; Posner, Strike,
Hewson, & Gertzog, 1982). Furthermore, when reading the Lecture-Tutorials them-
selves, faculty often have the same impression about the conceptual difficulty of the
materials; however, our research shows that students do not share this impression.




Fig. 2 University of Arizona
undergraduate students
observing the total solar
eclipse in Ghana, March 29,
2006
102                                                                           T. F. Slater

   The second step, and most central to the core of this project, is to use one of the
15-minute, collaborative-learning Lecture-Tutorials in the lecture classroom. Dur-
ing this time, faculty change roles from lecturer to facilitator, circulating among the
student groups, interacting with students, posing guiding questions when needed,
and keeping students on task.
   The final step of each Lecture-Tutorial is to debrief the content covered and to
bring closure for the students by eliciting student questions and comments. Another
common debriefing approach is to make explicit the reasoning needed to fully un-
derstand the concepts and provide students with accurate language to describe the
phenomenon under investigation. This is an important meta-cognitive step for both
the students and the instructor in that it provides useful insight into how the Lecture-
Tutorial experience has impacted student understanding. In addition to extensive
implementation notes, an online Instructor’s Guide also provides “post-tutorial”
questions that can be used to assess the effectiveness of the Lecture-Tutorial before
moving on to new material.
   As one example of how this is applied to moon phases, students are challenged to
consider a heliocentric view of the Earth, the Sun, as well as five different possible
positions for the Moon. Students are asked:
1. Which Moon position best corresponds with waxing crescent moon phase?
2. Give a reason why each of the other possible choices is not correct.
3. Shade in each of the four Moons to indicate which portion of the Moon’s surface
   will NOT be illuminated by sunlight.
4. Which Moon position best corresponds with the new moon phase.
5. How much of the entire Moon’s surface is illuminated by the Sun during this
   phase? Choose one: (a) None of the surface is illuminated; (b) Less than half of
   the surface is illuminated; (c) Half the surface is illuminated; (d) More than half
   the surface is illuminated; or (e) All of the surface is illuminated.
6. Consider the following debate between two students about the cause of the
   phases of the Moon. Do you agree or disagree with either or both students?
   Explain your reasoning for each.
   (i) Student 1-: The phase of the Moon depends on how the Moon, Sun and Earth
       are aligned with one another. During some alignments only a small portion
       of the Moon’s surface will receive light from the Sun, in which case we would
       see a crescent moon.
  (ii) Student 2: I disagree. The Moon would always get the same amount of sun-
       light; it’s just that in some alignments Earth casts a larger shadow on the
       Moon. That’s why the Moon isn’t always a full moon.
7. If the Sun sets below your western horizon about 2 hours ago, and the Moon
   is barely visible on the eastern horizon, is it a waxing or waning Moon that is
   visible?
8. A friend comments to you that he saw a beautiful, thin sliver of a Moon in the
   early morning on his way to work just before sunrise. Which phase of the Moon
   would this be, and in what direction would you look to see this moon phase (in the
   southern sky, on the eastern horizon, on the western horizon, high in the sky, etc.)?
A Contemporary Approach to Teaching Eclipses                                        103

A more recent approach has been to design questions and challenges for students
that can be delivered via interactive computer programs (Jones & Slater, 2004).
Their research project explored the effectiveness of Learner-Centered Education
(LCE) principles and practices on student learning and student attitudes in an on-
line, interactive, introductory astronomy course for non-science majors based on the
principles of Learner-Centered Education. To do this, the team created a hypermedia
learning experience for introductory astronomy that matches Internet technology
with how people learn. This course weaved multimedia visualizations into a struc-
tured learning environment by dividing complex concepts into bite-sized pieces.
Each cognitive piece contains hyperlinks explaining all terms as well as illustrations
using high-resolution images, animations, and videos which students manipulate to
answer questions. Each module helped students engage in the pursuit of learning
astronomy by providing activities where students use astronomical data. Learners
were required to answer pre-module questions, not as multiple-choice questions,
but as written narratives, about the concept under study to make their knowledge
explicit. At the conclusion stage, students compare new ideas with their initial an-
swers and evaluate various alternative explanations.
   Just in the last year, members of the University of Arizona’s Conceptual
Astronomy and Physics Education Research Team have been exploring how au-
tomatically computer graded tasks can improve student learning. In one application,
students are asked to sort a list of events into one of two categories uncovering
their understanding about when and where different moon phases are visible. As a
specific example, students sort the list: “(A) is visible near the western horizon about
an hour after sunset; (B) rises at about the time the Sun sets; (C) occurs 14 days after
the new moon; (D) sets 2–3 hours after the Sun sets; (E) is visible near the eastern
horizon just before sunrise; (F) is closest to being blocked by Earth’s shadow; and
(G) is visible about three days before new moon phase” into one of three categories:
(1) Waxing Crescent Moon; (2) Waning Crescent Moon; or (3) Full Moon.


Instructional Strategies to Circumvent Student Difficulties
with Eclipses
One approach to improving student learning for eclipses is to test their ability to
use the vocabulary of eclipses in the correct physical context. As one example,
members of the University of Arizona’s Conceptual Astronomy and Physics Ed-
ucation Research Team have been exploring how automatically computer graded
tasks can improve student learning. In one application, students are given six eclipse
vocabulary words: “(A) node; (B) umbra; (C) penumbra; (D) total lunar eclipse; (E)
total solar eclipse; and (F) annular eclipse” and asked them to correctly place them
in one of the following sentences.
1. A solar eclipse that occurs when the new moon is too close to Earth to completely
   cover the Sun can be either a partial eclipse or a(n)         .
2. During some lunar eclipses, the Moon’s appearance changes only slightly, be-
   cause it passes only through the part of Earth’s shadow called the          .
104                                                                          T. F. Slater

3. Anyone looking from the night side of Earth can, in principle, see a(n)    .
4. A partial lunar eclipse begins when the Moon passes into Earth’s        .
5. A(n)             can occur only when the Moon is new and has an angular size
   larger than the Sun in the sky.
6. A point at which the Moon crosses Earth’s orbital plane is called a(n)     .
The importance of vocabulary not withstanding, a much more involved approach
to teaching eclipses asks students to fully engage in both the social and scientific
aspects of eclipses. This can be done only if the essential questions students need
to be able to answer are established at the onset of the lesson and considerable
time is allocated to the lesson. I propose that a lesson that takes advantage of what
we now understand about student misconceptions and challenges to learning would
include the following three essential questions: (i) Do we need solar eclipses? (ii)
How much trouble would you go through in order to observe a total solar eclipse?
And (iii) What “magic” occurs during a total solar eclipse?
   To approach such overarching questions, the student learning goals would need
to be that students will understand that:
1. The Moon casts an umbral shadow and penumbral shadow
2. The sky’s appearance, animal behaviors, and human perspective often change
   during a total solar eclipse
3. Ancient peoples had such strong reactions to solar eclipses because of the impor-
   tance of the Sun in daily life
4. Scientists use the opportunity of a total solar eclipse to study the faint outer
   atmosphere of the Sun, called the solar corona
5. Scientists and non-scientists use the opportunity of a total solar eclipse for self-
   reflection and personal enrichment
6. People spend so much time, energy, and money to travel to view total solar
   eclipses
7. Solar eclipses occur because of a particular alignment of the Sun-Earth-Moon
   system
8. The size and scale of the Sun-Earth-Moon system impacts the apparent size of
   Sun and Moon and size of shadows
9. Total solar eclipses can only be observed from certain locations on Earth

And, students would need to be able to explain how total solar eclipses occur, ex-
plain why total solar eclipses do not occur with every New Moon phase, and use
a diagram of the Earth and Moon’s orbit around the Sun to describe the necessary
conditions for eclipses to occur.
   The beginning of such a lesson would involve students observing a video of people
watching an eclipse as invitation to learn are asked to individually write a short de-
scription of the behaviors and emotions of the people they are watching and provide
evidence to infer what they are experiencing or observing. They then get into small
groups to come up with a list of questions they “could” ask the people in the interview
about what they are observing and what they are feeling if they could chat with them
online or “instant message” them. (An extension activity for the overachieving teacher
A Contemporary Approach to Teaching Eclipses                                                    105

would be to actually find a friend online to role play as one of the people in the video
that would respond to appropriate and well formulated student questions, but answers
should be vague and suggest the person was not formally trained in science.)
    The next phase would be that students would be challenged to take a series of
print images of a solar eclipse withOUT time stamps and asked to arrange them
in a possible sequence and asked to relate the images to what they observed in
the video of people watching an eclipse and provide evidence for their inferences.
Students would then use models previously used for learning about moon phases to
reproduce conditions necessary for eclipses. Next, students would look at satellite
images showing eclipse shadows on Earth.
    For the final concluding activity, students would be challenged to create a cultur-
ally relevant celebration that would surround a predicted eclipse. This idea emerged
directly from the K12 educators workshop at the Ghana Eclipse Conference. The
celebration design would need to include a created song, chant or poem; an original
piece of artwork, either as a t-shirt design, a patch, or a flag; a feast with foods that
represent different aspects of the eclipse phenomena; and a timeline for which this
all would occur around an eclipse prediction.
    This final piece of the learning sequence is critical and should not be omitted.
This is because students need to have a conceptual understanding of eclipses tied
directly to their personal experience. If such a direct connection is not made, then the
newly learned concepts will quickly fade from memory. The next total solar eclipse
to pass over Ghana is more than twenty-years in the future, which is certainly long
enough that many students will have forgotten the scientific concepts surrounding
how eclipses occur. This exceedingly long time horizon makes it even more imper-
ative that teachers help students remember the nature of eclipses over the long term.
The next dramatic total solar eclipse for Africa will be August 02, 2027 when the
Moon’s shadow will skim the northern tier of Africa along the coastline. More sim-
ilar to 2006, the total solar eclipse occurring March 20, 2034 will follow nearly the
same path as the 2006 pathway, but slightly more southern passing through Nigeria,
Chad, and Sudan. This 2034 eclipse will go straight over the top of Accra, Ghana as
well. Given that eclipses will pass over any location quite infrequently, but because
total solar eclipses often happen somewhere in the world each year, solar eclipse
pathways do give teachers an opportunity to study the specific customs and cultures
of countries whose’ residents are experiencing a total solar eclipse. Thus, following
total solar eclipse events around the world give teachers an opportunity to pick a
country very different from their own to introduce to students.



References
Abell, S., George, M., & Martini, M. (2002). The Moon investigation: Instructional strategies for
  elementary science methods. Journal of Science Teacher Education, 13(2), 85.
Abell, S., Martini, M., & George, M. (2001). ’That’s what scientists have to do’: Preservice elemen-
  tary teachers’ conceptions of the nature of science during a Moon investigation. International
  Journal of Science Education, 23(11), 1095.
106                                                                                          T. F. Slater

Adams, J. P., Prather, E. E., & Slater, T. F. (2002). Lecture-tutorials for introductory astronomy,
   Preliminary Ed., Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Adams, J. P., Prather, E. E., & Slater, T. F. (2005). Lecture–Tutorials for Introductory Astronomy –
   First Edition, Prentice Hall, ISBN: 0-13-147997-0
Adams, J. P., & Slater, T. F. (2000). Astronomy in the national science education standards. Journal
   of Geoscience Education, 48, 39.
American Association for the Advancement of Science Project 2061. (1993). Benchmarks for sci-
   ence literacy, New York: Oxford University Press.
Ball, N., Coyle, H. P., & Shapiro, I. I. (Eds.) (1994). Project SPICA: A teacher resource to enhance
   astronomy education, Dubuque, IA: Kendall-Hunt Publishing.
Barnett, M., & Morran, J. (2002). Addressing children’s alternative frameworks of the Moon’s
   phases and eclipses. International Journal of Science Education, 24(8), 859.
Callison, P. L., & Wright, E. L. (1993, April). The effect of teaching strategies using models on
   preservice elementary teachers’ conceptions about Earth-Sun-Moon relationships. Paper pre-
   sented at the annual meeting of the National Association for Research in Science Teaching,
   Atlanta, GA.
diSessa, A. (1993). Toward an epistemology of physics. Dubuque Cognition and Instruction,
   10, 105.
Fanetti, T. M. (2001). The relationships of scale concepts on college age students’ misconceptions
   about the cause of lunar phases. Unpublished master’s thesis, Iowa State University, Ames.
Gregory, B., Luzader, W. M., & Coyle, H. P. (1995). Project STAR: The Universe in your hands,
   Dubuque, IA: Kendall-Hunt Publishing.
Haupt, G. W. (1948). First grade concepts of the Moon. Science Education, 32(4), 258.
Hewson, P. W. & Hewson, G. (1988). An appropriate conception of teaching science: A view from
   studies of science learning. Science Education, 72(5), 597–614
Hickman, J. B. (1993). Moon dance: A handy way to teach Moon phases. The Physics Teacher,
   v31, 178–179.
Janke, D. L., & Pella, M. O. (1972). Earth science concept list for grades K-12 curriculum con-
   struction and evaluation. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 9, 223.
Jones, L. V. & Slater, T. F. (2004). Assessment of an internet-delivered, interactive approach to
   introductory astronomy for non-science majors. Astronomy Education Review, 2(3).
Kikas, E. (1998). The impact of teaching on students’ definitions and explanations of astronomical
   phenomena. Learning and Instruction, 8, 439.
Klein, C. 1982, “Children’s concepts of the Earth and the Sun: A cross-cultural study,” Science
   Education, 65, 95.
Lindell, R. S. (2001). Enhancing college students’ understanding of lunar phases. Unpublished
   doctoral dissertation, University of Nebraska, Lincoln.
Lindell, R. S., & Olsen, J. P. (2002, August). Developing the lunar phases concept inventory.
   Paper presented at the American Association of Physics Teachers Summer Meeting (Physics
   Education Research Conference), Boise, ID.
Mazur, E. (1996). Peer Instruction: A User’s Manual, Prentice Hall Publishing; ISBN: 0135654416
Morrow, C. A. (2000). Kinesthetic astronomy: The Sky Tim Lesson. The Physics Teacher, v38,
   252–253.
National Research Council. (1996). National science education standards. Washington, DC: Na-
   tional Academy Press.
National Research Council. (1999). How people learn: Brain, mind, experience, and school.
   Washington, DC: National Academy of Sciences.
Pompea, S. M. (2000). Great ideas for teaching astronomy, 3rd edition. Brooks/Cole Publish-
   ing, USA.
Posner, G. J., Strike, K. A., Hewson, P. W., & Gertzog, W. A. (1982). Accommodation of a scien-
   tific conception: Toward a theory of conceptual change. Science Education, 66(2), 211–227.
Prather, E. E., Slater, T. F., Adams, J. P. Bailey, J. M., Jones, L. V., & Dostal, J. A. (2004). Research
   on a Lecture-tutorial approach to teaching introductory astronomy for nonscience majors. As-
   tronomy Education Review, 3(2)
A Contemporary Approach to Teaching Eclipses                                                     107

Sadler, P. M. (1992). The initial knowledge state of high school astronomy students. Unpublished
    doctoral dissertation, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA.
Schneps, M. P. (1989). A Private Universe [Video], San Francisco: Astronomical Society of the
    Pacific.
Schoon, K. J. (1992). Students’ alternative conceptions of Earth and space. Journal of Geological
    Education, 40(3), 209.
Slater, T. F. (1993). The effectiveness of a constructivist epistemological approach to the astronomy
    education of elementary and middle level in-service teachers. Unpublished doctoral disserta-
    tion, University of South Carolina, Columbia.
Slater, T. F. (2000). Astronomy Concepts in the Project 2061 Benchmarks. The Physics Teacher,
    38(9), 538–540.
Slater, T. F., Prather, E. E., & Zeilik, M. (2006). Strategies for Interactive Engagement in Large
    Lecture Astronomy Survey Classes in eds Joel Mintz and William Leonard, Handbook of Col-
    lege Science Teaching: Theory, Research, and Practice, pp. 45–54, National Science Teachers
    Association, NSTA Press, Arlington, VA. ISBN: 978-0-87355-260-8.
Slater & Zeilik (2003). Insights into the Universe: Effective ways to teach astronomy. American
    Association of Physics Teachers Press: College Park, MD (160 pages). ISBN: 1-931024-04-9.
Sneider, C. I., & Ohadi, M. M. (1998). Unraveling students’ misconceptions about the Earth’s
    shape and gravity. Science Education, 82(2), 265.
Sneider, C. I., & Pulos, S. (1983). Children’s cosmographies: Understanding the Earth’s shape and
    gravity. Paper Science Education, 67(2), 205.
Stahly, L. L., Krockover, G. H., & Shepardson, D. P. (1999). Third grade students’ ideas about the
    lunar phases. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 36(2), 159.
Trumper, R. (2000). University students’ conceptions of basic astronomy concepts. Physics Edu-
    cation, 35(1), 9.
Trumper, R. (2001a). A cross-age study of junior high school students’ conceptions of basic
    astronomy concepts. International Journal of Science Education, 23(11), 1111.
Trumper, R. (2001b). A cross-age study of senior high school students’ conceptions of basic
    astronomy concepts. Research in Science and Technological Education, 19(1), 97.
Trundle, K. C., Atwood, R. K., & Christopher, J. E. (2002). Preservice elementary teachers’ con-
    ceptions of Moon phases before and after instruction. Journal of Research in Science Teaching,
    39(7), 633.
Trundle, K. C., Atwood, R. K., & Christopher, J. E. (2003, March). Preservice elementary teachers’
    conceptions of Moon phases: A longitudinal study. Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of
    the National Association for Research in Science Teaching, Philadelphia, PA.
Teaching Cultural Astronomy:
On the Development and Evolution
of the Syllabus at Bath Spa University
and the University of Wales, Lampeter

Nick Campion



Abstract The Master of Arts in Cultural Astronomy and Astrology at the University
of Wales, Lampeter, formerly taught at Bath Spa University in England, is the first
degree of its kind in the world. (I shall refer to the discipline as Cultural Astronomy,
with initial letters as upper case, and the phenomena which it studies as cultural
astronomy, all lower case). My definition combines both the discipline and the
phenomenon; ‘Cultural astronomy: the use of astronomical knowledge, beliefs or
theories to inspire, inform or influence social forms and ideologies, or any aspect
of human behaviour. Cultural astronomy also includes the modern disciplines of
ethnoastronomy and archaeoastronomy’ (Campion 1997: 2).

   The MA program in Cultural Astronomy and Astrology was launched at Bath
Spa University in October 2002 and relocated to the University of Wales, Lampeter
in September 2007, although teaching continued at Bath Spa until June 2008.
   There are just two previous reports on the Bath Spa MA, by Michael York,
my predecessor as course director, and that focused on the astrological side of the
Cultural Astronomy-Astrology question (York 2004, 2007). Other academics have
set up individual classes as part of their teaching programmes but the Lampeter
programme remains the only full degree programme. In 2005 Bath Spa University
decided to close the programme rather than develop the distance learning pro-
gramme which the Centre regarded as an essential part of its work. The program then
transferred to the University of Wales, Lampeter, where teaching will be primarily
on-line. I mention this because it illustrates the problems of running a programme
in what is essentially an emerging discipline. That is, before we actually consider
pedagogical issues, particularly what Cultural Astronomy as an academic discipline,
which studies cultural astronomy as a human phenomenon, should consist of. What
should the syllabus contain, and are there appropriate theoretical models which can
provide a suitable framework?



Nick Campion
Director of the Sophia Centre for the Study of Cosmology in Culture, and Senior Lecturer in
Archaeology and Anthropology, University of Wales, Lampeter, UK (www.lamp.ac.uk/sophia)
E-mail: n.campion@lamp.ac.uk


J. Holbrook et al. (eds.), African Cultural Astronomy – Current Archaeoastronomy
and Ethnoastronomy Research in Africa.     C Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2008   109
110                                                                          N. Campion

    Navigating academic politics is only one part of developing cultural astronomy as
a discipline. The politics of knowledge are also crucial. The most obvious problems
in this respect are likely to arise in two areas, especially when the words astron-
omy and astrology are combined in the same degree title. First is the well-known
antipathy, ranging from bemusement to deep hostility, that characterizes many as-
tronomers’ attitude to astrology. Second is the question of whether astronomy, as
a science, is itself subject to cultural pressures. In cultural studies the view is that,
necessarily, even in terms of the scientific questions it asks and the manner in which
data is interpreted, astronomy is cultural. As Michael Hoskin (1996: 887), editor of
the Journal for the History of Astronomy, wrote, ‘What astronomy is not an astron-
omy in a culture?’ I do not believe that Professor Hoskin was taking the extreme
post-modern view that science is itself absolutely culturally conditioned but, as an
historian, he is aware that the kinds of questions that astronomers ask must condition
the results they achieve (see, for example, Hoskin 1999).
    The history of Cultural Astronomy as a discipline stretches back to the 1960s and
the furor created amongst archaeologists by Alexander Thom’s work on megalithic
sites in north western Europe in general, and Gerald Hawkins studies of Stone-
hange in particular, and the effective foundation of the modern study of archaeoas-
tronomy (see Campion 2004). The first and, to date, only substantial manifesto of
Cultural Astronomy’s scope and methodologies was published by Clive Ruggles
and Nicholas Saunders (1993). The essential problem Ruggles and Saunders iden-
tified was that archaeoastronomical methodologies lacked certainty. First, the deci-
sion about which points and criteria to use as a basis for measurement, especially
when stones may have moved over time, as well as the interpretation of results, are
both highly subjective. Second, while such problems might be partly overcome by
using statistical methods (the authors suggested Bayesian analysis), ethnographic
evidence is also necessary. This solution had been suggested by Elizabeth Chesley
Baity (1973), in her early use of the term ‘ethnoastronomy’.
    As the study of archeaoastronomy spread from a focus on European megaliths to
include the Americas in the late sixties and early seventies, American astronomers
discovered their own version of ancient astronomy in Mesoamerican ruins and, to
a lesser extent, in Native North American sites. This focus had its consequences;
due to Cultural Astronomy’s origins in Archaeastronomy its subject focus has re-
mained narrow. Of the nine papers in the 1993 Ruggles and Saunders volume, all
were on pre-modern and non-western topics. This emphasis pervades the litera-
ture, particularly the publications which result from the ‘Oxford’ conferences on
Archaeoastronomy and the meetings organized by the European Society for the
Study of Astronomy in Culture (SEAC) conferences, Archaeastronomy journal and
the now defunct Archaeoastronomy supplement to The Journal for the History of
Astronomy. The focus is almost exclusively pre-modern and non-western. Only the
Inspiration on Astronomical Phenomena (INSAP) conferences have extended the
remit to consider modern art and literature. It is clear then, that the subject area of
Cultural Astronomy needs to be extended. To exclude modern and western culture is
not possible if the discipline is to develop. Here again, we may refer to Ruggles and
Saunders who, in their introduction to Astronomies and Cultures, cited approvingly
Teaching Cultural Astronomy                                                                     111

Tristan Platt’s suggestion that we are in need of an ‘anthropology of astronomy’.
Platt’s words are somewhat more radical than this quote would suggest. He wrote
that,
   an historical anthropology of astronomy must emphasise the interaction between different
   cultural perspectives on history and time, rather than subsuming them within what is still a
   predominantly North Atlantic ‘World’ perspective. Hence the need to deconstruct the uni-
   versalising discourse of modern professional astronomy itself (still with an inbuilt tendency
   to appeal to a historicist account of its own past) if we are to arrive at an approach to the
   subject at once sociological and ethnoscientific, which recognises the recreation of different
   cultural histories as a more significant and viable prospect than an absolute (and inevitably
   ethnocentric) Universal History (1991: S83).

The implication of Platt’s perspective is that contemporary astronomers must be
able to reflect on and understand their own beliefs, practices and mythologies. Can
they follow Immanuel Kant, who famously wrote that ‘two things fill the mind with
ever new and increasing admiration and awe, the oftener and the more steadily we
reflect on them: the starry heavens above and the moral law within (1952: 360)’. It
was on the basis of the need to understand one’s own culture that I formulated a def-
inition of Cultural Astronomy in the first issues of Culture and Cosmos, the journal
on the history of astrology and cultural astronomy. I had read neither Ruggles and
Saunders nor Platt at the time, but my perspective was informed by my background
as an historian, so we were all moving in the same direction. My historical work
in Culture and Cosmos became the foundation of the MA in Cultural Astronomy
and Astrology, which was the main teaching focus of Bath Spa University’s Sophia
Centre. We developed the syllabus specifically to include contemporary western
cosmologies, including literature and the arts. For example, one student is current
preparing a dissertation on cinema as an alternative cosmology, drawing on studies
of the cosmological nature of Renaissance theatre (Yates 1978). The Sophia Centre’s
academic remit was defined in specific and general ways as follows:

a. to undertake the academic and critical examination of astrology and its practice;
b. to pursue research, scholarship and teaching in the relationship between astro-
   logical, astronomical and cosmological beliefs and theories, and society, politics,
   religion and the arts, past and present.

To complement the definition of Cultural Astronomy I used a definition of astrology
which seemed sufficiently neutral and broad: ‘the practice of relating the heavenly
bodies to lives and events on earth, and the tradition that has thus been generated’
(Curry 1999). I have defined three major forms of contemporary cultural astronomy,
all of which have featured to a greater or lesser degree in the syllabus. First and
most important is astrology. Second are the mystical, theosophical and New Age
cosmologies, from Immanuel Swedenborg to Rudolf Steiner, which provide a philo-
sophical context for contemporary astrology. Third and, least important in the cur-
rent syllabus are UFO cults and related theories concerning extraterrestrial life. The
MA’s emphasis has remained predominantly western, mainly due to the limitations
of staff expertise but also because, with a student body of under thirty, there is a
112                                                                         N. Campion

limit to the amount of material one can cover while retaining a coherent syllabus;
with the exception of a seminar on the religious context of Indian astrology there
has been no coverage of astrology in non-western cultures. Only the launch of a
distance learning programme, which is an aspiration, would make this possible in
the future. It would also be necessary to bring visiting professors together. The result
of the western focus, though, has been unexpected. With each year’s revisions of
the syllabus one philosopher assumed an increasing importance: Plato. It became
clear that Plato, though he flourished in fourth century BCE Athens, is the piv-
otal figure in western cosmology, including astronomy and astrology. He brought
together knowledge and wisdom from the entire Eastern Mediterranean and Near
East, including Greece, Egypt and Babylon, and formulated the belief in celestial
meaning which still underpins astrology and New Age cosmology, the notion of a
mathematical order which underlies modern science, including astronomy, and the
concept of an underlying ‘order’ which influences twenty first century mathematics.
As an illustration of Plato’s enduring influence, let me quote Roger Penrose: ‘The
mental images that each one has, when making this Platonic contact, might be rather
different in each case, but communication is possible because each is directly in
contact with the same externally existing Platonic world!’ (1991: 554–5). As Plato
himself said, ‘And so the heaven, revolving these very objects for many nights and
many days, never ceases to teach men one and two, until even the most unintelligent
have learnt sufficiently to number’ (1929: 978D).
    My own background is originally in political history and I welcome the approach
taken by those who are examining such problems as the politics of the space race
(for example www.astropolitics.org). However, for the simple reason that we cannot
cover everything, I have taken a slightly different direction. My syllabus’ empha-
sis is contemporary, but with a strong historical component designed to trace the
development of relevant beliefs, ideas and practices; for example, it is argued that
contemporary alternative spirituality needs to be understood in the context of clas-
sical Gnosticism. There is a strong anthropological and sociological component but
also a strong interdisciplinary element, in that historical and the Study of Religions
approaches are also applied.
    The first core module (Introduction) examines cultural astronomy, magic, astrol-
ogy and divination in a post-modern context.
    The second core module (Research Methods) requires students to undertake qual-
itative research using interviews or questionnaires, with a strong reflexive emphasis,
where appropriate.
    The optional modules explore the background to the ideas investigated in the
core modules, from a generally philosophical perspective.
    The history module examines the development of cosmological ideas in the west,
particularly astrology, with strong reference to Plato and requires familiarity with
approaches to the study of history.
    The stellar religion module explores New Age theories concerning the relation-
ship between the soul and the stars, examining origins in the ancient and clas-
sical worlds, and requires an understanding of main currents in the sociology of
religion.
Teaching Cultural Astronomy                                                                    113

    The psychology module examines psychological approaches, including Freud’s
attitudes and the sources, nature and implications of C.G. Jung’s work in astrol-
ogy, as well as that of post-Jungians such as James Hillman, and its penetration in
contemporary thought.
    The science module examines scientific sources and critiques of astrology, par-
ticularly in relation to theorists such as Paul Feyarabend, and the intellectual basis
of critical skepticism.
    The New Age module investigates the phenomenon of New Age belief within
the context of theories on millenarianism and the work of sociologists such as Paul
Heelas, Michael York and Wouter Hanegraaff.
    The sacred geography module investigates theories concerning the construction
of sacred space, with reference to such theorists as Ernst Cassirer, Mircea Eliade and
Christopher Tilley, and with attention to contemporary spiritualities. I hope that our
new location at Lampeter will enable us to develop studies in archaeoastronomy.
    Changes in the MA were prompted partly by my examination of whether Cultural
Astronomy is a subject area (i.e. astronomy and literature, astronomy and architec-
tural alignment, astronomy and the arts and so on) or a discipline with a coherent
methodology. As a subject area the emphasis has tended to emphasize such areas as
magic, divination, religion, science and psychology, a fairly broad swathe. There is
a strong contextual emphasis on the historical lineage of New Age culture and the
western esoteric tradition, in which key texts include Faivre (1994, 2000), Faivre
and Needleman (1992), Heelas (1996), Hanegraaff (1996) and York (1995). That is
the simple part of constructing a syllabus. The issue, though of Cultural Astronomy
as a discipline was one which Ruggles and Saunders had implicitly raised in 1993.
It’s also an issue addressed, from his sociological perspective, by Jim Pass (2004).
We have incorporated some sociological perspectives. For example from Max We-
ber (1991), we have taken the debate on disenchantment, pulling astrology’s con-
temporary appeal into perspective as an example of the push for ‘re-enchantment’.
The key, for me, though, was the use of the word cultural; the study is neither of
astronomy, nor astrology, nor of UFOs, but of culture. And that opens up huge
problems, as well as possible solutions. ‘Culture’, Terry Eagleton wrote, is said to
be one of the two or three most complex words in the English language, and the term
which is sometimes considered to be its opposite – nature – is commonly awarded
the accolade of being the most complex of all’ (2000: 1). He continued,
   It is hard to resist the conclusion that the world ‘culture’ is both too broad and too narrow
   to be greatly useful. Its anthropological meaning covers everything from hairstyles and
   drinking habits to how to address your husband’s second cousin, while the aesthetic sense
   of the word includes Igor Stravinsky but not science fiction. Science fiction belongs to
   ‘mass’ or popular culture, a category which floats nebulously between the anthropological
   and the aesthetic (2000: 32).

Eagleton’s pessimism aside I began to look at questions such as whether the MA was
examining astrology/astronomy in culture – i.e. as part of culture – or as a culture –
i.e. as a culture in itself. Then, of course there are sub-cultures within cultures. We
have touched on cultural theory, including ideas such as hegemony, which can be
useful for understanding the tense relationship between astronomy and astrology
114                                                                                     N. Campion

(see for example Hall 1998: 442–53). This may well be understood to be a matter of
scientific truth versus fantasy. But, if we consider that ninety percent of the people at
an astronomical gathering will be men, and ninety percent at an astrological meeting
women, we might begin to suspect that something more complex is going on, even
if only a matter of gender relations. Then there is the question of astronomers and
religious belief. The dominant discourse in astronomy is atheist, but there are no-
table exceptions, a recent one being Owen Gingerich the distinguished historian of
astronomy. The publicity for his book, God’s Universe (2006), is an open challenge
to the atheist consensus as well as, in a larger scientific context, Darwinianism:
   Owen Gingerich believes in a universe of intention and purpose. We can at least conjec-
   ture that we are part of that purpose and have just enough freedom that conscience and
   responsibility may be part of the mix. They may even be the reason that pain and suffering
   are present in the world. The universe might actually be comprehensible. Taking Johannes
   Kepler as his guide, Gingerich argues that an individual can be both a creative scientist and a
   believer in divine design – that indeed the very motivation for scientific research can derive
   from a desire to trace God’s handiwork (www.amazon.co.uk accessed 21 August 2006).

Such questions are an essential area of inquiry for the Cultural Astronomer. Neville
Brown (2006) has also recently inquired into issues arising from the interface be-
tween astronomy and faith. In an atmosphere such as that in the USA, in which
Christian evangelicals use of Intelligent Design is used to promote Creationist cos-
mology, work such as Gingerich’s is potentially seriously damaging for the anti-
Creationist case. The inquiry then into the religious culture of astronomers, whether
Creationist, atheist or in-between is one which we have touched on at Bath Spa, but
a full inquiry has been left for the future.
   While there is a strong historical component in the Bath Spa MA, in the traditional
sense of examining past cultures mainly through literary research, the contemporary
elements of the course have drawn on current developments in oral history, but more




Fig. 1 Dr Tim Slater (left) and Dr Nick Campion (right)
Teaching Cultural Astronomy                                                         115




Fig. 2 Mary Wehunt, Bath Spa University graduate (left) and Wendy Slater (right)



so, on the basis of influences from the study of religions, current developments in
sociology and anthropology (see for example, Bryman 2001, Silverman 1997), es-
pecially work of relevance for the investigation of contemporary astrology (Green-
wood 2000). We have, for example, placed a strong emphasis on grounded theory,
in which theory arises out of data, instead of, as all too often, data being arranged to
suit theory (Glaser 1978, Glaser and Strauss 1967).
    In particular phenomenological perspectives have been influential (see for ex-
ample Ferguson 2006, Sokolowski 2000). The phenomenological approach may
be simply defined as one ‘in which differing belief systems are examined as per-
ceived in their own terms, rather than by adopting a reductionist stance’ (Caird and
Law 1982: 153). As I developed the idea within the context of Cultural Astronomy,
the assumption is that the scholar can never be divorced from the scholarly process.
Phenomenological principles were first set out in 1913 by Edmund Husserl who
argued that it was essential that all inquiries into any area of human endeavour
touching on consciousness paid due respect to the ‘I’ (Husserl 1972: 7), the indi-
vidual’s subjective experience, rather than attempt to explain it away or reduce it
to quantitative measurement. This doesn’t mean that subjectivity undermines rigor.
Quite the reverse, the scholar can no longer pretend that their own conditioning,
bias and unconscious responses, have no impact on their inquiry. Phenomenology
was imported into religious studies by Ninian Smart in the 1970s. He had realized
that the entire field had been distorted by the privileged position afforded to Chris-
tianity and the subsequent misunderstandings that were imposed on other religions
(Smart 1973). The simple aim is the ‘qualitative understanding of the forms of life of
a religious tradition from that tradition’s standpoint’ (Twiss and Conser 1992: 27).
Over the course of the twentieth century Phenomenology has diversified into differ-
ent forms. It can suggest that there is an underlying essence underpinning the mate-
rial world, and in this sense is itself Platonic. However, Post-modern perspectives,
including the understanding of narratives, discourse and text, have also come into
116                                                                         N. Campion

play. These approaches are particularly appropriate in view of Babylonian notions
of astrology as the gods’ writing in the sky, Biblical belief in celestial signs and
modern claims that astrology is a symbolic language (see Best and Kellner 1991,
Jencks 1992). Postmodernity rejects metanarratives, universal explanations and so
can not accept Phenomenology’s assumption of an essential order. Instead I took
three ideas from Phenomenology. First, and very importantly if one is examining
astrology, UFO cults, New Age ideas or any other contemporary idea which is often
subject to ridicule, one needs to adopt a position best defined as methodological neu-
trality, the purpose being to penetrate and understand the cultural phenomenon under
investigation. There are substantial political issues to be aware of in this regard,
which are often highly complex and nuanced. For example, a western astronomer
who may be angry at, or contemptuous of, western astrology, would probably not
dare express the same sentiments regarding, say Native American cosmology or
sub-Saharan celestial divination. It is sometimes more difficult to look dispassion-
ately at one’s own culture, even more so at one’s self. The second idea I took
from Phenomenology, one that many would say lies at the heart of all academi-
cally sound qualitative research, is reflexivity; the researcher needs to be constantly
aware of his or her own position in order to avoid projecting assumptions on to
other people, and listen clearly (see for example Davies 1999). An understanding
of insider-outsider questions is essential (McCutcheon 1999). A researcher who is
interviewing a creationist on Biblical cosmology, or a channeller who communicates
with beings on the Pleiades has to be able to listen clearly and non-judgmentally.
Again, issues of truth or validity are less important than understanding the cultural
phenomenon.
    The third idea I borrowed from Phenomenology was the notion that one should
attempt to place one’s self inside the phenomenon. Again, I turn to Clive Ruggles
who argued that, ‘by walking in the modern landscape we can try to appreciate
patterns of relationship between monuments and the topographic elements of the
landscape as experienced by people living in that landscape in prehistoric times’
(Ruggles 1999: 151). He conceded that we can never exactly know that we expe-
rience the same feelings when watching an especially bright full moon as did a
prehistoric observer, but he does argue that ‘the idea deserves serious considera-
tion in contextual interpretations’. The idea is a radical one: at what point does the
scholar require a genuine experience of what is being studied. This is a problem
which has plagued anthropologists who realized, during the course of the twen-
tieth century, that they could not understand the beliefs and practices they were
studying unless they participated. But how far should that participation go (see
Evans-Pritchard 1967). Indeed, how far can it go if the anthropologist comes from an
alien culture? But the question needs to be asked whether one can truly understand
astronomy’s cultural impact if one has never had the experience of numinous awe at
the sight of a brilliant night sky. Recently Patrick Curry suggested that it is impossi-
ble to understand the history of astrology unless one has not just studied astrology,
which has been part of the medieval and Renaissance history of astrology at London
University’s Warburg Institute, but had an experience of it working (Curry 2005).
Similarly, on the experience of the solstice at Stonehenge, Ed Krupp wrote
Teaching Cultural Astronomy                                                                       117

   One should make a point of being there. Celestial events take place in context. When you
   see what actually happens in the landscape, you learn a great deal more about it. It is, of
   course, possible to determine the alignment of a building with instruments, but nuances of
   light and shadow details of the horizon, difficulties in practical observation, and many more
   subjective aspects of a site can only be appreciated in person (cited in Ruggles 1999: 151).

Can such approaches be genuinely helpful? I have made the argument that they
can elsewhere (Campion 2005b). Standard views of the origins of astronomy dwell
on the supposed superstitious fear and insecurity of Stone Age people. A typical
example is from Pannekoek’s A History of Astronomy. Talking of a hypothetical
cave-dweller, he wrote,
   To maintain himself he had to fight for his existence incessantly against the hostile forces
   of nature. The struggle for life occupied his thoughts and feelings entirely, and in this strug-
   gle he had to acquire such knowledge of the natural phenomena as influenced his life and
   determined his work; the better he knew them, the more secure his life became (1961: 19).

However, if we actually ask what modern astronomers – or anyone who is moved
by the sight of a brilliant full moon or bright starry sky – experience, it may be
astonishment, wonder, delight, inspiration, enlightenment and pleasure. This is also
a question I have begun to explore elsewhere (Campion, 2005a, 2006). As Peter
Haworth pointed out in 2001, ‘How do most people react to seeing a star-studded
night sky? With startled surprise’ (2001: 10). But all such experiences are embodied
and a self-reflexive phenomenological approach might reveal a quickening of the
pulse, a feeling of physical elation. So, did Stone Age people feel the same? Is
Pannekoek’s view, though typical, fanciful? Can we, as Ed Krupp suggested, project
our present experience back to the past, using ourselves and our own experience as
historical data? This, at least, is one question which we raised at Bath Spa Univer-
sity.
    The study of Cultural Astronomy is in its infancy but there are now suffi-
cient scholars involved to generate increasing awareness and understanding of the
complexities and importance of social and cultural relationships with the stars.
As more scholars become involved in the discipline, or subject area, issues of
syllabus and curriculum development will become more important. Chief among
these developments should be a new international focus, with scholars from Africa,
the Far East, South Asia and the Americas involved in seminars, conferences and
teaching. I hope that the Sophia Centre and the University of Wales, Lampeter, can
help facilitate such developments.


Bibliography
Baity, Elizabeth Chesley (1973), ‘Archaeoastronomy and Ethnoastronomy So Far’, Current
   Anthropology, Vol. 14 no 4, pp. 389–449.
Best, Steven and Douglas Kellner (1991), Postmodern Theory: Critical Interrogations, London:
   MacMillan.
Brown, Neville (2006), Engaging the Cosmos: Astronomy, Philosophy and Faith, Eastbourne:
   Sussex Academic Press.
118                                                                                   N. Campion

Bryman, Alan (2001), Quantity and Quality in Social Research, London: Routledge.
Caird, Dale and Henry G. Law (1982), ‘Non-Conventional Beliefs: Their Structure and Measure-
   ment’, Journal for the Scientific Study of Religion, Vol. 21 no 2, pp. 152–163.
Campion, Nicholas (1997), ‘Editorial’, in Culture and Cosmos, Vol.1 no 1, p. 1.
Campion, Nicholas (2004), ‘Introduction: Cultural Astronomy’, in Nicholas Campion, Patrick
   Curry and Michael York (ed.) Astrology and the Academy, papers from the inaugural conference
   of the Sophia Centre, Bath Spa University College, 13–14 June 2003, Bristol: Cinnabar Books,
   pp. xv–xxx.
Campion, Nicholas (2005a), ‘The Inspiration of Astronomical Phenomena’ in Nicholas Campion,
   (ed.), The Inspiration of Astronomical Phenomena, Proceedings of the Fourth Conference on
   the Inspiration of Astronomical Phenomena, Magdalen College, Oxford, 3–9 August 2003,
   Bristol: Cinnabar Books 2005, pp. xxviii–xxxix.
Campion, Nicholas (2005b), ‘The Possible Survival of Babylonian Astrology in the Fifth Century
   CE: a discussion of historical sources’, in Oestmann, Gnther, H. K. von Stuckrad, G. Oestmann
   and D. Rutkin (eds.), Horoscopes and History, Berlin and New York: Walter de Gruyter,
   pp. 69–92.
Campion, Nicholas (2006), ‘Sky and Psyche: Heaven and Soul’, in Nicholas Campion and Patrick
   Curry (ed.), Sky and Psyche, Edinburgh: Floris Books forthcoming..
Curry, Patrick, ‘Astrology’ (1999), in Kelly Boyd (ed.), Encyclopaedia of Historians and Historical
   Writing, London: Fitzroy Dearborn, 1999.
Curry, Patrick (2005), ‘The Historiography of Astrology: A Diagnosis and a Prescription’, in Oest-
   mann, Gnther, H. K. von Stuckrad, G. Oestmann and D. Rutkin (eds.), Horoscopes and History,
   Berlin and New York: Walter de Gruyter 2005, pp. 261–74.
Curry, Patrick and Roy Willis (2004), Astrology, Science and Culture: Pulling Down the Moon,
   Oxford: Berg.
Davies, C. (1999), Reflexive Ethnography: A Guide to Researching Ourselves and Others, London:
   Routledge.
Eagleton, Terry (2000), The Idea of Culture, Oxford: Blackwell.
Evans-Pritchard, E.E. (1967), Social Anthropology, London: Cohen and West Ltd.
Faivre, Antoine (1994), Access to Western Esotericism, Albany: State University of New York
   Press.
Faivre, Antoine (2000), Theosophy, Imagination, Tradition: Studies in Western Esotericism,
   Albany: State University of New York Press.
Faivre, Antoine and Needleman, Jacob (1992), Modern Esoteric Spirituality, London: SCM Press.
Ferguson, Harvie (2006), Phenomenological Sociology: Experience and Insight in Modern Society,
   London: Sage Publications.
Gingerich, Owen (2006), God’s Universe, Cambridge Mass: Belknap Perss.
Glaser, B.G. (1978), Theoretical Sensitivity: Advances in the Methodology of Grounded Theory,
   Mill Valley CA: Sociology Press.
Glaser, B.G and A.L. Strauss (1967), The Discovery of Grounded Theory: Strategies for Qualitative
   Research, Chicago: Aldine Publishing Company.
Greenwood, Susan (2000), Magic, Witchcraft and the Otherworld: An Anthropology, Oxford: Berg.
Hall, Stuart (1998), ‘Notes on Deconstructing the Popular’, in Story, John (ed.), Cultural Theory
   and Popular Culture: A Reader, Harlow: Longman, pp. 442–53.
Hanegraaff, Wouter J. (1996), New Age Religion and Western Culture, Leiden, New York:
   E.J. Brill.
Haworth, Peter (2001), ‘The Lost Stars’, Sky and Telescope, September 2001, p. 10.
Heelas, Paul (1996), The New Age Movement, Oxford: Blackwell.
Hoskin, Michael (1999), The Cambridge Concise History of Astronomy, Cambridge: Cambridge
   University Press.
Hoskin, Michael (1996), review of Ruggles, Clive L. N. and Nicholas J. Saunders (ed.),
   Astronomies and Cultures, Niwot, Col.: University of Colorado Press, 1993, Archaeoastronomy
   number 21, supplement to the Journal for the History of Astronomy, vol. 27, pp 885–887.
Teaching Cultural Astronomy                                                                 119

Husserl, Edmund (1972), Ideas: General Introduction to Pure Phenomenology, London: Collier-
    MacMillan [1913, Eng. trns.1931].
Jencks, Charles (1992), The Post-modernism Reader, London, Academy.
Kant, Immanuel (1952), Critique of Practical Reason, Great Books of the Western World 42,
    London: Encyclopaedia Britannica.
Krupp, Ed (1995). HASTRO History of Astronomy e mail list 8 August 1995, in Ruggles, Clive
    (1999), Astronomy in Prehistoric Britain and Ireland, New Haven and London: Yale University
    Press.
McCutcheon, R. (1999), The Insider/Outsider Problem in the Study of Religion: A Reader, Lon-
    don: Cassell.
Pannekoek, A. (1961), A History of Astronomy, London: George Allen and Unwin.
Pass, Jim (2004), ‘The Definition and Relevance of Astrosociology in the Twenty-First Century’,
    Part One: Definition, Theory and Scope’, www.astrosociology.com.
Penrose, Roger (1991), The Emperor’s New Mind: concerning computers, minds and the laws of
    physics, London: Vintage.
Plato, Epinomis (1929) trans. W.R.M. Lamb, Cambridge Mass., London: Harvard University Press.
Platt, Tristan (1991), ‘The Anthropology of Astronomy’, in Archaeoastronomy, the supplement to
    The Journal of the History of Astronomy, 1991, no 16, pp. S76–S83.
Ruggles, Clive and Nicholas Saunders (1993), ‘The Study of Cultural Astronomy’ in Ruggles,
    Clive and Nicholas Saunders, Astronomies and Cultures, Niwot CA: University of Colorado
    Press.
Ruggles, Clive (1999), Astronomy in Prehistoric Britain and Ireland, New Haven and London:
    Yale University Press 1999.
Silverman, D. (1997), ed, Qualitative Research: Theory, Method and Practice, London: Sage.
Smart, Ninian (1973), The Phenomenon of Religion, London: MacMillan.
Sokolowski, Robert (2000) Introduction to Phenomenology, Cambridge: Cambridge University
    Press.
Twiss, Sumner B, and Walter H. Conser (1992), Experience of the Sacred, Hanover: University
    Press of New England.
Yates, Frances (1978), The Art of Memory, London Peregrine.
Weber, Max (1991), From Max Weber: Essays in Sociology, ed. H.H. Gerth and C. Mills Wright,
    London: Routledge.
York, Michael (1995), The Emerging Network: A Sociology of the New Age and Neo-Pagan Move-
    ments, London: Rowan and Littlefield.
York, Michael (2004), ‘Insider/Outsider Methodological Problems with the Study of Astrology’,
    Paper represented at the British Association for the Study of Religion 50th Anniversary Con-
    ference, Oxford, 13–16 September 2004.
York, Michael (2007), ‘Postscript: The Rise and Fall of the Sophia Centre’, The Journal for the
    Study of Religion, Nature and Culture, Vol. 1 no. 2, pp. 259–263.
Evidence of Ancient African Beliefs
in Celestial Bodies

Felix A. Chami




Introduction
This paper aims to present some evidence which suggests that ancient Africans
believed that the celestial bodies, mainly the sun and the moon, were gods (for
conspectus see Chami 2006). Such evidence is not new to scholarship since in some
parts of Africa, such as the Nile Valley and North Africa there are ancient records
that clearly suggest so that God was represented by sun-discs with radiating rays (see
Casson 1966; Bolliger et al. 2006: 330–331). It is when it pertains to Africa South
of Sahara that such evidence becomes controversial (see Figs 1–6; Willcox 1972).
It will be shown for instance that scholars object to ideas on rock paintings and in
ancient records that points to Sub-Saharan Africa having a solastic religion or some
knowledge of astronomy.
   By the concept “ancient” I mean the period from 3000 BCE to 500 CE. In the
early part of this period, 3000–1000 BCE, Egyptian Dynastic culture was operat-
ing linked with the Neolithic sub-Saharan Africa. In the later period, and partic-
ularly after 600 BCE some parts of Sub-Saharan Africa developed polities which
were either trading or interacting with new non-African Egyptian powers such as
Carthaginians/Phoenicians, Persians and Graeco-Romans. It should be noted at this
juncture that from about 600 BCE Egypt was invaded by non-African forces from
Asia and Europe. These new rulers assumed the powers of Pharaoh and like the
previous African Pharaohs attempted to interact and trade with the rest of Africa.
Records of such intercourses are discussed elsewhere (Chami 2006).
   I should also present the focus of this paper at this onset. The paper wants to pro-
vide direct and circumstantial evidence which suggests that Africans of the ancient
time revered some celestial bodies. This is more of religious matter than astronomy
or astrology. Clive Ruggles (2005) has discussed these two concepts in detail. It
will however be suggested that the ancient people of Sub-Saharan Africa had some
astronomical knowledge of which some evidence exists in historical records. Astro-
logical practice is also indicated.

Felix A. Chami
History/Archaeology Department, University of Dares Salam
E-mail: fchami@udsm.ac.tz


J. Holbrook et al. (eds.), African Cultural Astronomy – Current Archaeoastronomy
and Ethnoastronomy Research in Africa.     C Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2008   121
122                                                                                F. A. Chami




Fig. 1 Kondoa rock paintings with sun discs with rays. Top are rayed discs around elephants and
below are human beings superimposed on a big disc (After Leakey 1983: 53)

   In modern day ethnography the sun and moon have been used by Africans to
regulate their monthly and annual activities sometimes more unconsciously than
consciously. Probably the Musi of Ethiopia are presented as one example of African
groups who are quite conscious of that aspect (Ruggles and Turton 2005). The
Muslim communities of the Swahili people are another group known to have used
the celestial bodies as calendar for religious, sailing and other economic purposes.
The Mwaka Kogwa festival, termed by Chittick (1975:4) as Nairuz in order to link
it with Persian festival, heralding the beginning of the New Year, is one of those
activities related to calender. I participated in one of the festival in July 2007.


Problem
Africa south of Sahara has been viewed to have people without sophisticated reli-
gious belief system. Putting aside areas which had adopted Islam, the rest of Africa
is mapped as belonging to animism (Getis et al. 2004: 258):
Evidence of Ancient African Beliefs in Celestial Bodies                                          123




Fig. 2 Kondoa rock paintings with sun with rays at the middle space (After Leakey 1983: 59)



   Animism is the name given to their belief that life exists in all objects, from rocks and trees
   to lakes and mountains, or that such objects are the abode of the dead, of spirits, and of
   gods.

It should be noted at this juncture that a belief in one god who cuts across tradi-
tions is conceptualized as universalizing religion (Getis et al. 2004: 257). So the
Egyptian belief in Amun Ra, which became a hidden god with the rays of the sun
(Casson 1966: 74), was accepted as a universalizing religion, believed beyond the
borders of Egypt to the rest of Africa, Asia and Europe (Casson 1966: 74) and
probably elsewhere (see Jairazbhoy 1974).




Fig. 3 Kondoa rock paintings with the moon crescent or sun eclipse crescent (After Leakey
1983: 63)
124                                                                                    F. A. Chami

Fig. 4 Muleba, Lake Victoria
paintings with sun and rays at
the upper middle space
(Photo by the Author)




  Whether linked to Egypt or not, Eastern and Southern Africa was recognized by
some scholars before 1970 to have had a belief in the sun-god. The region has a
widespread painting/engraving of sun/moon discs. Collinson (1970) studied such a
phenomenon on western Tanzania and compared them with those found in central
Tanzania and southern Africa. He argued that:

   The worship of cosmic bodies has probably had the widest following of any religious cult
   in the world. Africa has been no exception, where the sun has been thought of extensively
   as the source of life, or high god, and where there is often a directional symbolism incorpo-
   rating the movement through life, from birth to death, in a process from east, the point of
   the sun to west, the point of the moon and death. (Collinson 1970: 60).

However, this view, which is well entrenched in the work of Mary Leakey (1983), is
refused by some scholars. They view the widespread painted and engraved circles
as childish work or doodling.




Fig. 5 Mawe Matatn (tree stones) at Kiwangwa, Bagamoyo in Tanzania revered by the local people
Evidence of Ancient African Beliefs in Celestial Bodies                                          125

Fig. 6 Muleba, Lake Victoria
paintings showing stars
(Photo by the Author)




   Collinson accuses me of rejecting diffusion as the explanation of the similarity of the circle-
   based designs found as far apart as Patagonia, Ireland and South Africa, without my sug-
   gesting another explanation. But I did suggest another, which has been ignored, that Jung’s
   theory of archetypes is correct at least in the respect that certain forms rise spontaneously
   and universally from the unconscious mind, and that one of these is the mandala-the circular
   design. (Willcox 1972:168).

This paper is in support of Collinson’s diffussionist idea as already elucidated else-
where (Chami 2007). The sun god religion and other beliefs in celestial bodies had
existed in Africa for several millennia. Egyptians have a record of it from about
3000 BCE suggesting that it must have been in Africa or spread from there to other
continents by then or before (Jairazbhoy 1974)



Some More Evidence
As noted earlier, most of the evidence I discuss below is not new. Only that a new
perspective has to be thrown on it countering the recent developments which tend to
deny ancient belief in sun-god in Africa.



Megalithic Sites
One aspect which is universally accepted as evidence of sun-god worship is the ancient
practise of erecting stones, sometimes in circles, in the position where the sun or
the moon was probably worshipped or properly observed. As Ruggles (2005) has
already presented about this, the stone circles are sometimes associated with burial
places. These appear in good numbers in western Sahara (see Africa 2009: 20).
   In Africa south of Sahara only one place is known and other possible sites remain
to be discovered or confirmed. The site is Namoratunga stone circles in Turkana
region of Kenya studied by Lynch and Robbins (1978). The stones were described
to have had astronomical alignment and among other aspects associated included
126                                                                                 F. A. Chami

burials and geometric rock engravings. The stones were not regarded as a worship-
ping place, but to calculate the annual calendar (see Soper 1982).
   The denial that this site had nothing at all to do with celestial bodies either in wor-
shipping or calendar was raised by Soper (1982). He argued that the astronomical
function raised by Lynch was based on “faulty survey data and must be rejected”
(Soper 1982: 156). Most stones measured by Soper were found not to have any
alignment to stars. Lynch (See Soper 1982: 168) rebutted arguing that while he
could have been wrong in some aspects raised by Soper he keeps to his position:
   At this point I am not prepared completely to reject the calendric reckoning hypothe-
   sis. . . although I will agree that their argument is weakened by the non-alignment of two
   stones (Lynch and Sopher 1982: 158).

The circles are thought to date to late pre-Christian era extending probably to early
Christian era. You need to add the more recent work by Doyle and Frank which
remeasures the stones and shows the alignments (1997).
    Another region with a number of megalithic sites stone circles is that of Bouar of
western Central African Republic. The monuments are identified as Tazunu. “Today
most monuments appear as low earthen mounds littered with granite blocks and
slabs of various sizes, very few of which are more or less erect.” (David 1982: 43).
The purpose of these monuments is unknown and astronomy is not hypothesized by
Nicholas David (1982). However, given the popular scholarly conception of asso-
ciating megalithic sites with sun-god religion I would not hesitate driving such an
hypothesis here. The date of the Central African monuments is like those from other
parts of the world of Late Stone Age with pottery. David has dates ranging from the
7th century to the 6th century BCE.
    It is likely that Africa has several other megalithic features which are either man-
made or non-man-made used for purpose of worshipping. By non-man-made struc-
tures I mean a natural occurrence of arranged stones erected towards stars or just
standing or creating a passages or shadows as one of the example below suggests.
Johnson Urama (this volume) presents about one man-made site in Nigeria used to
worship sun-god. One nom-man-made site also exists at Kiwangwa, in the hinterland
of Bagamoyo, Tanzania with several standing megaliths which could have occurred
naturally due to gully erosion which is associated with an escarpment. The residents
revere the place which they identify as mawe matatu (three stones) (see Fig. 5) and it
is not clear how long these stones have existed in the area. The stones are however in
an archaeological site with aceramic Late Stone Age materials. One charcoal sample
was collected and dated back to 10,000 BP. (see Chami 1996). This date is probably
too early for an aceramic site, although not impossible. Sites with such dates have
been accepted in Turkana, Kenya (Barthelme 1985) and Far-east Asia (Yasuda 2002).
However more work is needed in the Bagamoyo site to collect more dating materials.

Sites with Drawings of the Celestial Bodies
It was suggested earlier that paintings/engravings of sun-like discs are widespread
in Eastern and Southern Africa (Willcox 1984: 242–243). Most discs have rays sug-
Evidence of Ancient African Beliefs in Celestial Bodies                                       127

gesting the sun or moon. It was shown earlier that Willcox who presents the majority
of these discs does not belief that these were made to represent the sun or the moon.
But other scholars such as Collinson (1970) and Leakey (1983) view them that way.
    However, it is my opinion that not all drawn discs or circles with inside marks
would represent sun or moon. It has been noted that the Schematic/Geometric/
Amorphous (SGA) paintings/engravings of the region of Africa and elsewhere en-
compassed circular figures which like the accompanying drawings represented a
type of script (see Fell 1975; Chami 2006). It seems that what Willcox (1984:
242) presents as petroglyphs of Redan include what would qualify as sun/moon
symbols which appear in central Tanzania (Figs. 1 and 2). Collinson (1970) figures
from Makalo in western Tanzania also represent suns. It is also very obvious that
Leakey (1983: 63) (see Fig. 3) has a picture of the moon crescent or an eclipse of
sun in which the sun is in crescent shape. The Lake Victoria region is abundant
of SGA paintings. The paintings are rarely associated with figures which could be
considered to be sun or moon. One such symbol has however been observed (Fig. 4).
Many circles associated with SGA paintings either have internal divisions or are
filled with dots (Fig. 5) suggesting literary symbols. At one place in Muleba star
symbols (Fig. 5) appear clearly suggesting celestial bodies (Fig. 6).
    The dates for the drawings of sun like discs and other circular figures in Africa
remain controversial. However, a few dates can be presented here. Collinson (1970),
also quoting Fosbrooke, argues that:

   It would seem safe to say that some of our Tanganyika paintings probably date back for
   thousands rather than hundreds of years. A claim to “thousands” can not be made for
   Makalo on the evidence available, but a correlation of these two writers’ ideas when applied
   to Makalo suggests an age of a thousand or more years (Collinson 1970: 59)

It should be noted that most of Leakey’s Kondoa drawings were painted with red
colour. Leakey (1983: 124) proposed a date before 1500 BP for this kind of painting
and beyond to 29,000 years ago. It is my opinion that the sun-god religion dates back
to the Neolithic or before when it can be shown to be practiced in Egypt and the rest
of North Africa by cultural groups which worshipped the sun-god. In the language of
these cultural groups the etymon “t”, which represented sun-god, is profuse in the
names of the people, towns and physical features such as mountains. To reiterate
what is published elsewhere (see Chami 2006) mountains of North Africa include
Atlas, Tassili and Tibest, people such as Tuareg, Tibu, Atlantes and Atarantians and
towns such as Tripoli and Tunis. I have suggested that “t” is profusely used in some
parts of Africa suggesting the spread of it probably from North Africa in about 700
BE and afterwards.
    It is actually appropriate to mention here the profuse use in Meso-America of
“t” word in the same manner as Africa and in the same time period, from about
1000 BCE. One prominent example are the names of nearly all the Mesoamerican
monumental settlements including Teotihuacan, Tenochtitlan (see more in Forte and
Siliotti 1997: 265) and even in the names of people such as Aztec. Scholars such as
Jairazbhoy (1974) have argued for the ancient spread of sun-god culture from Africa
to Americas.
128                                                                                   F. A. Chami

   In Lake Victoria the dates from charcoal samples associated with ochre pencils
used to paint/produce painting colour is between 500 BCE–200 CE. (Kwekason and
Chami 2003). Phillipson (1976) dates similar paints to the same period.


Historical Records
There are few ancient records which suggest that Africa south of Sahara had
communities which either venerated cosmic bodies or had a knowledge of them
or what we could view as astrology. These documents were believed to not have
referred to the region south of Sahara because of academic biases already discussed
elsewhere (Chami 2006). Probably the earliest one was by Herodutus who narrated
of Cambyses, the Persian King of Egypt, sending troops to the long living Ethiopians
in about 525 BCE to look for the “table of the sun”-probably referring to a calendric
device. Most scholars think the land of long lived Ethiopians to which the mission
was sent was Nubia (Cary and Warmington 1963: 206; Adams 1984: 294). How-
ever, Herodutus clearly suggested that the concept Ethiopian stood for Black people
of Africa and not to the modern Ethiopia. He also described the location of the
Ethiopian territory in which the mission was sent in the following manner:
   After this Cambyses took counsel with himself and planned three expeditions, one way —
   and a third against the long-lived Ethiopians, who dwelt in that part of Libya which borders
   upon the Southern Sea (Rawlinson 1964: 218).

It is apparent that the part of Africa (Libya) that borders the Southern Sea would
have been the region along the waters of Indian and Atlantic Oceans of Sub-Saharan
Africa as indicated by Herodutus on his own map of the world (see Riad 1981: 196).
For him the southern part of Africa had a semi-circular curvature with the Indian and
Atlantic Oceans forming the Southern Sea.
    In about 300 BCE, or a bit later, a number of Greeks seem to have visited the
coast of East Africa and were aware of the location of the islands and interior.
The documents discussing Panchea, the land visited, or the island of the sun are
again not believed by scholars to be Eastern Africa. The documents themselves are
not believed by scholars. Cary and Warmington (1963: 236) have classified those
documents under the title: wonderlands and Utopias. Despite that entitlement the
two authors would still speculate that the location of Panchea or the islands of that
territory could have been on the Horn of Africa and Sokotra. These speculations
have been countered by this author elsewhere suggesting that Panchea was in East
Africa (Chami 2006).
    According to Euhemerus in the land of Panchea there was near the temple of
the priests the river with the name “water of the sun” (Oldfather 1961, Vol. 3: 219).
And according to Iambulus, in the island of the sun, supposedly Panchea, the people
“sung in honor of the gods hymns and spoken laudations, and especially in honor of
the sun, after whom they name both the islands and themselves” (Oldfather 1963,
Vol. 2: 81). Elsewhere the people of the island of the sun are reported to “give
attention to every branch of learning and especially to astrology (Oldfather 1963,
Evidence of Ancient African Beliefs in Celestial Bodies                                  129

Vol. 2)”. It should also be mentioned that the Pancheans are reported to have written
from up to down or vertically. At the Namuratunga stone circles the erected stones
are engraved with SGA symbols vertically. The dates given to the stone circles and
that of Panchea is the same as noted earlier, 300 BCE or earlier.


Oral Traditions
In this volume some papers from Nigeria can offer some ethnographic and literacy
works suggesting that Africa still has aspects of sun and moon worship. It is redun-
dant to go through each ethnic group of sub-Saharan Africa for the sake of show-
ing the obvious: that the sun is believed to have ruled and created the world. And,
the moon has always been viewed as the sun’s concert. The Chaga of Kilimanjaro
still holds their sun-god-Iruwa as the highest god-Mungu. Pronounciation of their
Mungu-Iruwa/Iriwa is reminiscence of the Egyptian Amung-ria. The Bible has been
translated into Kichaga language among the Lutherans. The “God” in the Bible is
directly translated as Iruwa-the sun-god of the Chaga people. This god is also seen
to belong to water pools (see Chami 2006)


Conclusion
The purpose of this paper was to provide more evidence on the ancient African belief
in deified celestial bodies and the possible use of celestial calendars and astrology.
It has been demonstrated with a small data sample that such phenomenon existed
in ancient times. It was shown that the larger part of Africa had already adopted a
universalizing religion notwithstanding the degree of animism that may have con-
tinued to coexist with the new faith. Indeed until today both Christianity and Islam,
the new universalizing religions, continue to coexist with traditional African belief
systems forming a kind of syncretism.
    For instance all caves on the islands of eastern Africa are worshipped by Muslims
who believe that the caves or panga (belonging to god or spirit) are invested with an-
cestral sprit. They are either shrines or revered places. This is the same with ancestral
shrines, water pools and forest grooves which are associated with either benevolent
or malevolent spirits all over Christian and Muslim Africa. Most of what was raised
above is probably already known, but not discussed before with contextualizing the
problem. This paper is rather a reaction against denials raised in the problem section
and ignorance of data.


References
Adams, W. 1984. Nubia: Corrindor to Africa. Princeton: Allen Lane.
Africa 2009. The intangible in the tangible heritage. Newslettter 6.
Barthelme, J. 1985. Fisher-Hunters and Neolithic pastoralists in East Turkana, Kenya. British
   Archaeological Reports, Oxford.
130                                                                                    F. A. Chami

Bolliger, et. al. 2005. Egypt: land and lives of the Pharaohs revealed. Willoghby: Global book
    publishing.
Cary, M. and Warmington, E. 1963. The ancient Explorers. Middlesex: Penguin Books.
Casson, L. 1966. Ancient Egypt. Nederland: Time-life International.
Chami, F. 1996. The excavation of Kiwangwa Late Stone Age site. In Pwiti, G. and Soper, R. (eds),
    Aspects of African Archaeology. 307–316. Harare: University of Zimbabwe.
Chami, F. 2006. The unity of the African ancient history: 3000 BC- AD 500. Mauritius: E&D
    Publishers.
Chami, F. 2007a. Diffusionism in the studies of the African Past: reflections from new archeologi-
    cal findings. African Archaeological Review 24(1–2): 1-14.
Chittick, N. 1975. The peopling of the East African coast. In Chittick, N. and Rotberg, R. (eds),
    East Africa and the orient: Cultural syntheses in pre-colonial times, 16–43. New York: Africana
    Publishing Company.
Collinson, J. 1970. The Makolo rock paintings of Nyamwezi. Azania 5: 55–64.
David, Nicholas 1982. Tazunu: Megalithic monuments of Central Africa. Azania 17: 43–78.
Doyle, L. and E. Frank 1997. Astronomy in Africa, in Encyclopaedia of the history of science, tech-
    nology, and medicine in non-western cultures, H. Selin, Editor. Kluwer Academic: Dordrecht ;
    Boston. pp. 554–557.
Fell, B. 1975. America BC: Ancient settlers in the new world. New York: A Demeter Press Books.
Forte, M. and Siliotti, A. 1997. Virtual Archaeology: Re-creating ancient worlds. New York: Harry
    N. Abrams.
Getis, A. et al. 2004. Introduction to Geography. New York: The McGraw-Hill Companies.
Jairazbhoy, R. (1974). Ancient Egyptians and Chinese in America. George Prior Association Pub-
    lishers, London.
Kwekason, A. and Chami, F. 2003. Archaeology of Muleba, south west of Lake Nyanza. In Chami,
    F., Pwiti, G. and Radimilahy, C. (eds), Climate Change, trade and modes of production in
    Sub-Saharan, 59–85. Studies in the African Past 3. Dar-es-Salaam University Press.
Leakey, M. 1983. African’s vanishing art: the rock painting of Tanzania. New York: Doubleday
    and Comp.
Lynch, B. & Robbins, L. 1978. Namoratunga: the first archaeoastronomical evidence in sub-
    Saharan Africa. Science 200: 766–8.
Oldfather, C. H. (Trans.)1961. Diodorus of Sicily. (12 volumes). London: William Heinemann.
Phillipson, D. 1976. The prehistory of Eastern Zambia. Nairobi: British Institute in Eastern Africa.
Rawlinson, G. (trans.) 1964. The histories of Herodotus. London: J.M. Dent & Sons.
Riad, H. 1981. Egypt in the Hellenistic era. In Mokhtar, G. (ed.), General History of Africa 11:
    Ancient Civilizations of Africa. 184–225. California: Heinemann.
Ruggles, C. 2005. Ancient astronomy. Santa Barbara: ABC-Clio.
Ruggles, C. and Turton, D. 2005. The haphazard astronomy of the Mursi. In Chamberlain, V. et al.
    (eds), Songs from the sky: indigenous astronomical and cosmological traditions of the world,
    298–309. Sussex: Ocarina books.
Soper, R. 1982. Archaeo-astronomical Cushites: some comments. Azania 17: 145–162.
Willcox, A. 1984. The rock art of Africa. New York: Holmes and Meier Publishers
Willcox, A. 1972. Solar symbols in prehistoric rock art. Azania 7: 167–169.
Yasuda, Y. 2002. Origins of pottery and agriculture in East Asia. In Yasuda, Y. (ed.), The origin of
    pottery and agriculture. Kyoto: International Research Centre for Japanese Studies.
Astronomy of Nabta Playa

J. McKim Malville, Romauld Schild, Fred Wendorf and Robert Brenmer




Introduction
The Southwestern desert of Egypt, now one of the driest areas on the Earth, was
not always so inhospitable. Beginning about 9000 BC the summer monsoon rains
moved northward from central Africa and created a landscape where nomadic
pastoralists with their cattle could survive (Wendorf et al. 1992–1993; Wendorf
et al. 2001; Wendorf and Schild 1998; Schild and Wendorf 2004). Even with rains it
was still a dry environment with an annual rainfall no more than 100–150 mm. Rain
was unpredictable and the climate was punctuated with numerous droughts, some
of which caused the desert to be abandoned for long periods of time. Game was
scarce, consisting of small gazelles and hares. Cattle were walking larders of milk,
blood, and meat, used in a manner similar to those of modern Masai. Cattle allowed
people to live in the desert, thereby controlling their lives and dominating much of
their ceremonialism.
    Located 100 km west of Abu Simbel, Nabta Playa is a large internally drained
basin. During the early Holocene (ca 9000–6100 BC), the playa was seasonally
flooded attracting nomads to bring settle intermittently on its shores (Figure 1) The
first settlements at Nabta were small seasonal camps of cattle-herding and ceramic-
using people. These people probably came into the desert after the summer rains
from either farther south or the adjacent Nile, in search of pasture for their cattle.
Each fall, when the water in the playas dried up, they had to return to the Nile or to
better watered areas in the south.
    The depression of Nabta Playa was covered with potential fodder grasses fol-
lowing the summer rains and would have been a very attractive area for grazing
by wild and domesticated animals. In addition to grasses and seeds of other plants.
Boerhavia has edible seeds and leaves which are grazed today by sheep and goats.
Seeds of Schouwia were also found at Nabta. That plant has palatable leaves for
human consumption and is good fodder for cattle. Eating its leaves reduces the need


J. McKim Malville
University of Colorado, (303) 492-8766
E-mail: kim.malville@colorado.edu


J. Holbrook et al. (eds.), African Cultural Astronomy – Current Archaeoastronomy
and Ethnoastronomy Research in Africa.     C Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2008   131
132                                                                  J. M. Malville et al.




Fig. 1 Location of Nabta Playa



for water. Large stands of Schouwia often develop in depressions after monsoon
rain, growing so high that camels can not be seen within them. Animals could also
feed upon parts of shrubs and trees such as Acacia (Wasylikowa 2001).
   By 7000 BC settlements became larger, and their inhabitants survived in the desert
throughout the year by digging large deep wells. They lived in organized villages
consisting of small huts arranged in straight lines. By 6800 BC they began to make
local pottery. A few hundred years later around 6100 BC sheep and goats appear for
the first time, which were almost certainly introduced from southwest Asia.



Ceremonial Center

Nabta probably began to function as a regional ceremonial center during the Middle
Neolithic (6100–5500 BC) during the summer wet season. By a regional ceremonial
center we mean a place where related but geographically separated people gather
periodically to conduct ceremonies and to reaffirm their social and political identity.
The center at Nabta gives evidence of a complex ideology, centered on themes of
Astronomy of Nabta Playa                                                            133

death, earth, water, skies, and cattle. These gatherings occurred along a dune on
the northwestern shore of the basin where there are hundreds of hearths, extensive
cultural debris, and many bones of cattle. While present at most other sites, bones
of cattle are elsewhere never very numerous, which is good evidence that they were
kept primarily for their milk and blood, rather than for meat. This pattern resem-
bles the role of cattle among modern African pastoralists, such as the Masai, for
whom cattle represent wealth and political power. They are rarely killed except on
important ceremonial or social occasions such as death of a leader or marriage.
   Following a major drought which drove earlier groups from the desert, the Late
Neolithic began around 5500 BC with a new group that had a complex social system
expressed in a degree of organization and control not previously seen. These new
people, the Cattle Herders (also known as the Ru’at El Baqar people), appear to have
been responsible for first establishing the ceremonial center at Nabta Playa. The
newcomers had a complex social system that displayed a degree of organization and
control not previously seen in Egypt. They sacrificed young cows and buried them
in clay-lined and roofed chambers covered by rough stone tumuli and constructed
many tumuli having both surface and subterranean features.


The Valley of Sacrifices and the Calendar Circle

Along the western rocky bank of a shallow valley entering Nabta Playa from the north,
which we have called the Valley of Sacrifices, there are about ten identifiable mounds
of broken sandstone blocks. These mounds contained offerings of large articulated
pieces of butchered cattle, goats, and sheep. The largest and perhaps the oldest tumulus
contained an entire young cow, the most precious offering that a herder can make, con-
tained in an elaborate chamber covered by a tamarisk roof (Figure 2). A piece of wood
from its roof yielded a radio carbon date of about 5500 years BC. Probably a female
just entering adulthood, the animal, lying on its left side, was oriented approximately
north-south, with its head in the west. This wadi brought water to the playa after the
first rains at the beginning of summer, and thus would have been an appropriate spot
to have performed cattle sacrifices, asking the gods for rain.
    The wadi ends in a small a stone circle on top of a small sandy knoll (Malville
et al. 1998; Applegate, 2001) (Figures 3, 4 & 5). The circle contains sets of upright,
narrow slabs. Two pairs of slabs aim the eye approximately to the north and to the
position of the rising sun at summer solstice, which would have been near the start
of the rainy season. A radiocarbon date from a hearth adjacent to the circle yielded
a date of around 4900 years BC. Its center contains six upright slabs arranged in
two lines, for which the astronomical functions, if any, are not clear. One of our
Bedouin workers reported that it was not uncommon in the desert to set similar
stones the sand and watch their moving shadows as time keepers. Another well-
known stone circle was discovered by Bagnold (1931) in the Libyan Desert. It is
larger, 8.5 meters, but seems to be made up of the same kind of thin stone slabs as
at Nabta. No evidence of astronomical orientations has been reported, and none is
readily discernable in photographs of the circle.
134                                                                J. M. Malville et al.

Fig. 2 Skeleton of a Young
Cow




The Complex Structures
To the south of the Valley of Sacrifices are a series of knolls carved in the ancient
lake clays by the desert winds. The area contains several dozen complex megalithic
structures built during the Final Neolithic by the Megalith Builders (Bunat El Asnam




Fig. 3 Calendar Circle
Astronomy of Nabta Playa                                                          135




Fig. 4 Reconstruction of Calendar Circle


people). The Final Neolithic at Nabta Playa extended from 4600 BC to abandonment
of the area in approximately 3400 BC. The complex structures are identifiable on the
surface by groups of sandstone blocks, which were originally set in silt deposited
during the final part of the Early Neolithic.
    The groups of shaped sandstone blocks consist of megaliths ranging in weight
from several tons to less than 50 kg (Schild and Wendorf 2004). A few upright, and
other broken bases were found still embedded in the clays, suggest that originally the
had been set up vertically, facing north. The dynamics of collapse involved the pre-
vailing northerly winds that carved holes in front of the megaliths and caused their
collapse. These depressions can be found underneath the collapsed large blocks,
indicating that the individual stones generally faced north. Many are sculptured in
a manner similar to the blocks of the alignments, with anthropomorphic shoulders




Fig. 5 Profile of Calendar Circle
136                                                                J. M. Malville et al.

suggesting that they represented the dead. Groups of these shaped stones may rep-
resent souls of departed members of clans or extended families.
   The largest of the complex structures, A, appears to play a major role in the
symbolism that overlies the ceremonial center in the Final Neolithic (Wendorf and
Krolik 2001). We originally thought the structure might contain elite graves, but
excavation has failed to disclose any human remains. It is the focus of the five ra-
diating megalithic alignments. The builders of the structure had dug a pit through
playa sediments to expose a table rock at a depth of 2.6 m. The rock is quartzitic
sandstone that remained after the surrounding softer sediments had been removed by
erosion. A similar rock was found under the second and the third complex structure
that were excavated a fourth rock was located under a cluster of slabs by a probe.
The table rocks were probably formed during the initial deflation of the Nabta basin
by wind, long before the deposition of the playa sediments. In the case of Complex
Structure A, the northern and western sides of the table rock were shaped and its top
was probably worked and smoothed. After shaping the oval rock measured 3.3 m by
2.3 m with its long axis aligned north-south.
   The pit was partially refilled and a large secondary stone, weighing 2–3 tons, was
placed above the center of the table rock. This secondary stone was also slightly
shaped with a large head-like projection facing slightly west of north. It was held
upright by two large slabs set against the structure at its north end. One side had
clearly been smoothed by pecking. The stone has a vague resemblance to a cow and
may have represented a surrogate sacrifice. What is clear is that considerable effort
was expended in quarrying the stone, shaping, transporting, and placing it on top of
the table rock.


Alignments
After reanalysis of our previous measurements and a new campaign of mapping the
sandstone blocks of the area, we identify five alignments of megaliths that radiate
outward from Complex Structure A (Figures 6, 7 & 8 ). We also have likely dates
for the placement of these stones in the sediments of the playa based on carbon dates
from the nearby quarry. Approximately 100 m east of the quarry is a storage area
where dozens of additional sandstone blocks are resting for use. Five radio carbon
dates from the quarry are 4500 BC to 4200 BC. Since we also have a carbon date
for complex structure E at 3600 BC, we estimate that the megalith period lasted for
approximately 800–900 years from 4500 BC to 3600 BC. A closer inspection of the
stones reveals most were worked, shaped into apparently anthropomorphic shapes,
and many were set in the sand approximately facing north.
    Our original measurements of the megaliths (Wendorf and Malville 2001) have
been complemented by satellite imagery by the Quickbird satellite in 2002 and addi-
tional GPS measurements by Brophy and Rosen (2005). We are gratified that there
is good agreement with regard to the locations of the megaliths by these independent
measurements. In our analysis we combine the two sets of GPS data and the satellite
results.
Astronomy of Nabta Playa                                                          137




Fig. 6 Tilted megalith in northern alignment; tents of field camp in background


Alignments at Nabta Playa
For our calculations of precession we have used the formulae of Bretagon et al.
(1997). Because of the movement of the dunes over 6–7 millennia, it is difficult to
estimate the actual horizon, and we assume a level horizon. Many of the slabs are
scattered and fragmented, and in estimating the dates when these alignments may
have been oriented to certain stars, we include an uncertainty of ±0.6◦. While we
had originally considered Dubhe, the brightest star in Ursa Major, to be a possi-
ble candidate for the three northernmost alignments, Arcturus now appears to be a
much more likely choice during the period of megaliths (4500–3600 BC). It is the




Fig. 7 Top of buried megalith
138                                                                  J. M. Malville et al.

Fig. 8 Alignments at Nabta
Playa




brightest star in northern celestial hemisphere, and there were three occasions when
alignments A1, A2, and A3 were oriented to the rising positions that star in that span
of time. Each of these three alignments may have been to account to the changing
location of the star due to precession.
   A fourth alignment, B1, would have lined up with Sirius, which is the bright-
est star in the night sky and α Centauri, which is the third brightest, in the period
4600–4300 BC. The final alignment, B2, may have been lined up with Alnilam in
the belt of Orion between approximately 4400–4200 BC and/or with winter solstice
sunrise. A close inspection of the southernmost alignment, which we had initially
designated as C, indicates that it consists of stones resting on the slopes and tops of
erosional silt hillocks and may not represent an original set of aligned slabs.


Stellar Associations of the Megalithic Alignments
With the exception of Canopus, these alignments might have been associated with
the brightest stars in the night sky of Nabta. (Figure 9; Table 1) In 4500 BC Canopus
Astronomy of Nabta Playa                                                            139




Fig. 9 Orientations of Alignments


would have risen with an azimuth of 159◦ and would have reached a maximum altitude
of approximately 8◦ above the southern horizon. It is conceivable that the slight rota-
tion of some of the megalithic slabs away from north-south was due to an attempted
alignment with the rising position of that star. Another possible geometry of the site
involves the approximate right angles between A3/B2 and A1/B1, which possibility
has a certain credibility because of the interest the nomads in the cardinal directions.
   In their analysis of the positions of the alignments Brophy and Rosen (2005)
propose that the southernmost alignment, C, (which we consider to be problematic
because of migration of the stones) was associated with Sirius in 6088 BC and
that the other alignments are associated with Vega and stars of Orion in 6270 BC.
Their suggested dates are about 1500 years earlier than our best estimates for the
establishment of a ceremonial center. Brophy (2002) has also suggested that the
table rock of Complex Structure A is a map of the Milky Way galaxy dating from
17,500 BC, showing spiral arms and a neighboring dwarf galaxy. He also proposed
that the stones of the stone circle represent a map of the stars of Orion as early as
16,500 BC. These extremely early dates are not consistent with the archaeological
record. Before about 9000 BC, the Saharan desert had no settlements beyond the
Nile valley. With the arrival of monsoon rains, the hyper-arid desert was replaced
by savannahs and occupied by nomadic pastoralists (Kuper and Kropelin 2006;
Wendorf and Schild 2001). After about 5000 BC human settlements became well
established, including the ceremonial center at Nabta Playa. There is no archaeo-
logical evidence whatsoever supporting the idea that a high culture was present in
the Eastern Sahara as early as 17,000 BC. The likelihood of a culture interested in
establishing the alignments in the playa in 6000 BC is also very slight. Inference in


                  Table 1 Orientations and Identification of the Alignments
                Alignment      Azimuth(degrees)
                A3              26.3                  Arcturus
                A2              28.3                  Arcturus
                A1              30.6                  Arcturus
                B2             116.6                  Alinlam Winter solstice
                B1             120.1                  Sirius α Centauri
140                                                                 J. M. Malville et al.

archaeoastronomy must always be guided and informed by archaeology, especially
when substantial field work has been performed in the region.


Prehistoric Herdsmen
Judging from the elaborate burials at the nearby cemeteries at Gebel Ramlah, the
nomads associated with the ceremonial center were prosperous, healthy, possess-
ing a strong aesthetic sense, and interested in preserving and honoring their dead
(Kobusiewicz and Schild 2005). These cemeteries are some 20 km from Nabta Playa
and are most likely part of the extended community that established the ceremonial
center and alignments. Since it is a rare opportunity to learn about people associ-
ated with such an early ceremonial center, it seems worthwhile to describe these
prehistoric herdsmen in some detail. The most reliable carbon dates are from bone
collagen giving almost 4400 years BC. The cemeteries contained 67 individuals
in both primary and secondary inhumations. Inspection of dental features indicates
that there were two different populations of Mediterranean and sub-Saharan peoples
represented in the cemeteries.
   The exceptional wealth of grave goods is notable. Many were buried with ce-
ramic pots, some of which were elaborately decorated. Vessels known as tulip
beakers were apparently produced exclusively as grave goods and usually placed
on the chest or near the head. They were accompanied by sets of cosmetic artifacts
consisting of stone pallets, stones for grinding color-bearing minerals, and contain-
ers made of ivory, bovine horn, stone, or ceramic. Many of the graves contained
large sheets of mica, more than 10 cm across and 1 cm thick. They must have been
highly prized since they were frequently buried in the vicinity of the head. One sheet
was shaped in the form a tilapia, a fish frequently encountered in the Nile. This is
the oldest known sculpture to be discovered in Egypt.
   This was a healthy and prosperous community. The lack of dental enamel hyper-
plasia, an indicator of growth disruption during early childhood, also indicates that
children must have been healthy and well-fed. The tall stature of the burials suggests
good health and nutrition. Secondary inhumations may have been of individuals who
died while traveling. All 7 primary inhumations were in flexed position, oriented to
west, facing south (Figure 10).
   The cemeteries indicate that there was a keen interested in preserving the remains
of the dead. There were two skulls in which some of the upper teeth were replanted
in the lower jaw and vice versa. The forearm of one woman was found with four
bracelets, which had been fastened to the skeleton. Other skulls were found with 18
teeth placed an eye socket and three placed in the nasal aperture. Many of the burials
were sprinkled with large amounts of red hematite dust, which in many cultures is
associated with blood, the life force, and high status.
   An important conclusion we can draw from these burials, is that the people living
near or visiting the playas of Gebel Ramlah and Nabta participated in a wide trading
network, which could bring them into contact with ideas as well as trade goods.
Their contacts stretched far as evidenced by a turquoise nose plug, of which the
closest known source is 1000 km to the north on the Sinai Peninsula. Shells were
Astronomy of Nabta Playa                                                         141

Fig. 10 Adult burial facing
south




brought in from the Nile; mica came from the distant mountains along the seacoast;
ivory came from elephants further south.
   Each of the three cemeteries contains the graves of individuals who seem to have
belonged to single clans. The individual graves that preserved anatomical order were
of people who died at the settlement and were interred there. The secondary graves,
in which the skeletons are co-mingled and incomplete, can be interpreted as burials
of higher status individuals who died during the distant migrations of the herders.
The bodies may have been transported throughout the grazing season until the no-
mads returned to the vicinity of the ceremonial center. Alternately, they may have
been exposed to animals such as Catal Huyuk (Malville N.J. 2005) or buried and
subsequently disinterred. The disarticulated remains were placed in the graves at
Gebel Ramlah without preserving anatomical order (Kobusiewicz and Schild 2005).
It was important to bury them in the clan cemetery at a site that was believed to be
the center place for the culture.

Summary and Conclusions

The evidence for astronomical observations by these ancient herdsmen comes in
three forms. The repetitive orientation of megaliths, human burials, and cattle buri-
als toward the northern regions of the sky reveals a very early symbolic connection
to the northern regions of the sky, and it is the most substantial evidence of as-
tronomy. The groups of shaped stones facing north may have represented spirits of
142                                                                         J. M. Malville et al.

individuals who died either on the trail or locally. The second bit of evidence for
astronomy is found in the stone circle with its two well-identified sightlines toward
the north the positions of the rising sun at June solstice. Finally, the alignments of
sandstone slabs, which are oriented to bright stars in the fifth and fourth millennium,
suggest an even more careful attention to the heavens. The dates for possible asso-
ciations with the brightest stars largely agree with the dates at the quarry and the
cemetery.
    Interest in the northern part of the heavens does indeed seem pervasive during the
Final Neolithic at Nabta Playa and Gebel Ramlah, where we have found orientations
to the north. The northern circumpolar region of the sky is that realm where stars
never set and later in dynastic Egypt was identified as the realm of eternal life.
Survival in the desert may have required an ability to navigate by the stars, as the
nomads moved across the sea of sand without trails or major landmarks. There was
no bright star at the north celestial pole at that time, but north could easily have been
inferred from the circulation of stars around that region in the sky. On a flat northern
horizon, the positions of the rising and setting of bright stars could have been marked
by cairns and the midway position would have been north. North could have been
established during the day by shadow casting of a vertical stick or gnomon.
    The complex groups of slabs provide the greatest enigmas of Nabta Playa. Why the
buried table rocks were chosen as the buried center piece and how they were located
beneath the sands remain a puzzle. It seems unlikely that that the rocks had been
found accidentally during excavation for wells, as these were in dunes at the edge of
the playa and not in the playa sediments. Perhaps these large table rocks were revered,
as in animistic traditions, for possessing supernatural forces or souls (Eliade, 1974).
Unusual rocks have been viewed as sources of power and spirit throughout history,
and these may have attracted attention earlier than the late Neolithic before they were
submerged in the blowing sands. Their presence may have been part of the cultural
memory of the community, and their location may have been revealed by slight mounds
in the sand. In any case, this grouping of buried stones, water of the playa, human and
cattle burials, the solstice sun, and stellar alignments appears to identify powerful and
evocative symbols of these ancient herdsmen.



References
Applegate, Alex. 2001. “Site E-92-9: A Possible Late Neolithic Solar Calendar.” In Holocene Set-
   tlement of the Egyptian Sahara: The Archaeology of Nabta Playa. Kluwer Academic, New
   York, pp. 463–467.
Bagnold, R. A. 1931. “Journeys in the Libyan Desert 1921 and 1920.” The Geographic Journal,
   Vol LXXVIII No. 1.
Bretagon P., Rocher P., and Simon J. L. 1997. “Theory of the Rotation of the Earth.” Astronomomy
   and Astrophysics 319: 305–317.
Brophy, Thomas G. 2002. The Origin Map: Discovery of a Prehistoric, Megalithic, Astrophysical
   Map and Sculpture of the Universe. Writers Club Press, New York.
Brophy, Thomas G. and Paul A. Rosen. 2005. “Satellite Imagery Measure of the Astronomically
   Aligned Megaliths at Nabta Playa.” Mediterranean Archaeology and Archaeometry 5: 15–24.
Astronomy of Nabta Playa                                                                    143

Eliade, Mircea. 1974. Patterns in Comparative Religion. New American Library, New York,
    pp. 216–238.
Kuper, Rudolph and Stefan Kropelin. 2006. “Climate-Controlled Holocene Occupation in the Sa-
    hara: Motor of Africa’s Evolution.” Science 313:803–807.
Malville, J. M., Fred Wendorf, Ali A. Mazar, and Romauld Schild. 1998. “Megaliths and Neolithic
    Astronomy in Southern Egypt. Nature 392 (488–490)
Malville, N. J. 2005. “Mortuary Practices and Ritual Use of Human Bone in Tibet.” In Interacting
    with the Dead: Perspectives on Mortuary Archaeology for the New Millennium, ed. G. Rakita,
    J. Buikstra, L. Beck, and S.Williams. University Press of Florida, Gainesville. pp. 190–206.
Kobusiewicz, Michal and Romuald Schild. 2005. “Prehistoric Herdsmen.” Academia- The Maga-
    zine of the Polish Academy of Sciences. No.3 (7) 20–23.
Schild, Romuald and Fred Wendorf. 2004. “The Megaliths of Nabta Playa.” Academia- The Mag-
    azine of the Polish Academy of Sciences. No. 1 (1) 10–15.
Wasylikowa, Krystyna. 2001. “Site-75-6: Vegetation and subsistence of the Early Neolithic at
    Nabta Playa, Egypt, Reconstructed from Charred Plant Remains.”In Holocene Settlement of
    the Egyptian Sahara, Volume 1. The Archaeology of Nabta Playa. Kluwer Academic, New
    York, pp. 544–591.
Wendorf, F. A. and H. Krolik. 2001. “Site E-96-1: The Complete Structrures or Shirnes.” In
    Holocene Settlement of the Egyptian Sahara, Volume 1 The Archaeology of Nabta Playa.
    Kluwer Academic, New York, pp. 503–520.
Wendorf, F. A. E. Close, and R. Schild. 1992–1993. “Megaliths in the Egyptian Sahara.” Sahara
    5:7–16.
Wendorf, F. A. and J. McKim Malville. 2001. “The Megalithic Alignments.” In Holocene Settle-
    ment of the Egyptian Sahara, Volume 1 The Archaeology of Nabta Playa. New York: Kluwer
    Academic/Plenum Publishers, New York, pp. 489–502.
Wendorf, Fred and Romuald Schild. 1998 “Nabta Playa and Its Role in Northeastern African
    Prehistory. Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 17: 97–123.
Wendorf, Fred, Romuald Schild, and Associates. 2001. Holocene Settlement of the Egyptian
    Sahara, Volume 1 The Archaeology of Nabta Playa. Kluwer Academic.
Romans, Astronomy and the Qibla: Urban Form
and Orientation of Islamic Cities of Tunisia

M. E. Bonine




This paper examines the role of the qibla (direction to Mecca) for the orientation
and structure of traditional Islamic cities in Tunisia. First, the various ways in which
the qibla direction may have been calculated in the medieval Islamic world are
discussed. Then several of the principal Tunisian cities are examined to show the
relationship between the qibla and urban structure, indicating in these cases that
not only were astronomical phenomena perhaps significant, but also that the earlier
extensive Roman presence may have had a profound effect on the Islamic settlement
orientation – and, hence, the direction of the qibla as well.
    The influence of the qibla for the orientation of religious architecture is due to
the Qur’anic injunction for Muslims to face in prayer the Ka’ba, the cubic structure
in Mecca that becomes a central focus in Islam. In most cases a mosque is a rect-
angular building which has one of its walls facing in the direction of Mecca, this
being the qibla wall which contains the mihrab or prayer-niche that indicates this
sacred direction for prayer. In some situations there may be internal skewing of the
qibla wall – or even of the entire interior, although this pattern is not common. A
number of mosques in Cairo, for instance, do have this characteristic and hence the
street direction will not be aligned with any walls of the interior (Kessler, 1984).
Also, when a church or other religious building is converted into a mosque there
may be a new skewed qibla wall constructed within the existing structure – or in
other instances, the wall closest to the perceived direction of the qibla might be used
without any internal adjustment. When Mehmet II conquered the Byzantine capital
of Constantinople in 1453, one of his first acts was to convert the great church of Ha-
gia Sophia into a mosque. The mihrab within the existing building was established
some 10 degrees south of the main axis of the church.
    The usual situation, however, is that a rectangular mosque (or other Islamic
building) will be surrounded by streets – and housing or other buildings – which
are parallel with the axis of the mosque. Hence there will be a rectangular grid
system which will be in the same orientation as the qibla. If the mosque were built
first, as was often done in newly established Islamic cities, then the street pattern


M. E. Bonine
University of Arizona


J. Holbrook et al. (eds.), African Cultural Astronomy – Current Archaeoastronomy
and Ethnoastronomy Research in Africa.     C Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2008   145
146                                                                         M. E. Bonine

may have evolved around the structure, orthogonal to the qibla axis. In fact, a great
many traditional Islamic cities in the Middle East and North Africa have a rather
regular rectangular or orthogonal morphology. In some cases, as in Damascus, the
Islamic city evolved upon an earlier Roman or Greco-Roman grid system. And even
if there were a deterioration of the extremely regular grid (as shown in the classic
study of Damascus by Sauvaget, 1934), the basic orthogonal system still remains. In
other cases, as in many traditional Iranian cities supplied by qanats, an orthogonal
morphology results principally from rectangular irrigation and field systems, and the
slope characteristics play the predominant role in the orientation of those systems
(Bonine, 1979).
    In many if not most traditional Islamic cities, the direction of the religious struc-
tures and the axis of the street systems – and hence the alignment of the cities –
all correspond with one another. The significant problem, then, is to explain this
relationship and, more importantly, what are the specific influences which determine
these patterns and orientations? Do mosques determine the street patterns – or does
topography determine street orientations and hence even the direction of the qibla
and the alignment of the religious buildings? It is important to understand these
relationships because the possibility that newly established Islamic cities were laid
out in relation to the direction of Mecca is most significant. It would mean that Islam
has played a major role in the actual layout of cities, and that a sacred direction
and orientation was important in Islamic city planning. First, however, we need to
examine briefly how the qibla was determined in medieval Islam.



The Sacred Direction in Medieval Islam
Within the last several decades David King, a scholar trained in mathematics, Islam,
and the history of science and technology, has examined many Arabic manuscripts
in order to explain how the qibla was determined by Muslim astronomers and math-
ematicians in the Medieval Islamic period (King, 1982, 1984, 1985, 1986, 1987,
1995, 1999). At least from the ninth century there were mathematical calculations
using trigonometric formulae or geometric constructions for determining the qi-
bla, using the great circle distance from a particular city to Mecca (Fig. 1). There
were many astronomical handbooks with tables (zijes) which were modeled after
Ptolemy’s Geography and which contained sections on determining the qibla by
specific mathematical procedures (King, 1985, 317). However, it appears that “the
earliest Muslim qibla determinations were cartographic, in that they can all be de-
rived by considering plane representations of the part of the terrestrial globe between
the locality and Mecca” (King, 1986, 89). Such systems often treated the meridians
as parallel straight lines as well as the parallels of latitude being parallel straight
lines (Fig. 2). Also, it should be mentioned that from the fourteenth century onwards
the compass was available for determining the qibla.
   Yet, often the mathematically calculated qibla – or the use of a compass later –
was not always followed, using instead some other method of determination. What is
Romans, Astronomy and the Qibla                                                   147




Fig. 1 The Mathematical Calculation for Determining the Qibla
Source: King, 1985, 317


surprising is that evidently there were often a number of accepted qiblas of different
directions at the same locality – although these may reflect separate time periods as
well. As King (1982, 304) asks, “Why are so many medieval mosques, according to
modern historians of Islamic architecture, not properly aligned towards Mecca?”




Fig. 2 The Geometric Calculation for Determining the Qibla
Source: King, 1985, 317
148                                                                       M. E. Bonine

    The orientation of the earliest mosques in Islam often emulated the practice
of Muhammad as well as the Companions of the Prophet. Muhammad (and the
Companions) had prayed directly south from Medina to Mecca. Hence, in Palestine
and Syria the first qiblas also became due south. King (1985, 319), for example,
notes that “in Jerusalem the Aqsa Mosque was built in the year 715 on the rect-
angular Temple area. Its mihrab was aligned with the major axis of the complex
to face roughly due south. This direction was favored as the qibla in Jerusalem in
later centuries even though the astronomers had calculated that according to the
available geographical data the qibla in Jerusalem was about 45◦ east of south.”
Similarly, in Damascus where the Byzantine cathedral was aligned by cardinal di-
rections (along with the grid pattern of the Greco-Roman city), when it was con-
verted into a mosque the southern wall became the qibla wall and “the qibla of
due south was favoured over the centuries in spite of the fact that the astronomers
had calculated the qibla there at about 30◦ east of south (King, 1985, 319). Since
churches were usually aligned in cardinal directions, when many of them were con-
verted to mosques in Syria or Palestine they therefore already had a south-facing
qibla wall.
    In other parts of the early Islamic world, mosques were sometimes aligned in car-
dinal directions with the south wall being the qibla in much of the Middle East and
North Africa. This cardinal orientation (with the qibla to the south), for example, oc-
curred even in Islamic Spain, facilitated once again by converting cardinal-oriented
churches to mosques. The fact that the eighth century Umayyad Caliphate of Spain
had its original roots in Syria – with their qibla directly south – may have influenced
a similar practice in the Iberian Peninsula. In areas to the northeast of the Arabian
Peninsula, as in Central Asia and areas farther to the east, cardinal directions may
also sometimes have constituted the main axes of the religious architecture – but,
especially where influenced by the Hanafi legal school, the western side might well
be the qibla wall.
    However, many, if not most, mosques were not built in cardinal directions. The
earliest mosque in Egypt, the Mosque of Amr in Fustat (the predecessor settlement
south of the future Cairo), for instance, was built facing the winter sunrise [Decem-
ber 21st], while the earliest mosques in Iraq faced the winter sunset (King, 1985,
319). Both these directions remained popular for later mosque orientations, even af-
ter the mathematicians had calculated the “correct” great circle directions. Through-
out the Islamic medieval world different orientations began to be used in different
regions and even cities. As King (1985, 320) has noted, “the qibla in individual
localities (became) defined in terms of an astronomical horizon phenomena, such as
the rising or setting of a prominent star or of the sun at the equinoxes or solstices.”
At least in some of the popular folk astronomical texts, mention is made of even
wind directions being used to determine the qibla. It should also be pointed out
that according to some legal scholars, it was permissible to pray in any direction
which would be within one’s field of vision when facing the Ka’ba directly – which
is slightly more than one quadrant (Ibid). During the Islamic Middle Ages various
Muslim scholars also devised diagrams of the world divided into various sectors
about the Ka’ba (Fig. 3a). In many of these schemes each sector was identified with
Romans, Astronomy and the Qibla                                                      149




Fig. 3 The Orientation of the Ka’ba
Source: King, 1982, 307; 1985, 324; King and Hawkins, 1982, 105

specific rising or setting of prominent stars or star groups (e.g. the Pleiades), or in
terms of the sunrise or sunset at the solstices, the cardinal directions, or specific
winds (Ibid).
   The orientation of the Ka’ba itself also has influenced the alignment of religious
buildings in many parts of the Islamic world. This sacred cube, existing even in pre-
Islamic times (but as a much simpler structure) is astronomically aligned at 30◦ S of
E, the major axis facing not only winter sunrise but also the rising point of the star of
Canopus (at least according to some Arabic texts (Fig. 3b). With such an orientation
the minor axis points towards the rising point of the sun at midsummer. Certain
lunar sightings at the solstices are also mentioned by the Arabic texts (Fig. 3b),
although the accuracy of these astronomical determinations of the Ka’ba varies.
And, according to folk astronomical traditions each of the four major winds also
blow so that they strike one of the sides of the Ka’ba (Fig. 3c).
150                                                                       M. E. Bonine




Fig. 4 Accepted Qiblas for Cordova, Cairo and Samarkand
Source: From Arabic Texts, in King, 1985, 325


   The significance of the Ka’ba for the orientation of mosques is noted by Hawkins
and King (1982, 102): “The qibla walls on some medieval mosques were intended
to be ”parallel” to one wall of the Ka’ba, this ”parallelism” being achieved by fac-
ing the mosque towards the same astronomical horizon phenomena as one would
be facing when standing in front of the appropriate wall of the Ka’ba.” Therefore,
alignments could be used to orient a mosque anywhere in the Islamic world in order
for the building to have the same axes as the Ka’ba itself. Hence, the first Muslims
“knew that, when facing a particular wall or corner of the Ka’ba in Mecca, one was
facing a particular solar or stellar rising or setting point; they assumed that away
from Mecca, if one faced in that same astronomical direction one would still be
facing the same wall or corner of the Ka’ba” (King, 1982, 309–310).
   There developed, therefore, during the Islamic medieval period a number of
“accepted” qibla directions within most cities which were based upon either cer-
tain important astronomical directions or various other determinations. King (1985,
324–325) has examined, for example, the main qibla directions from certain Ara-
bic texts for Cordova, Cairo and Samarkand (Fig. 4). In Cordova, according to a
probable twelfth century work on the astrolabe, the qiblas were: a) the direction
computed by the mathematicians using the standard formula based upon the latitude
and longitude for Cordova and Mecca; b) the direction of winter sunrise; c) directly
southeast; d) the direction of the Great Mosque of Cordova – being perpendicular to
the northwest wall of the Ka’ba; and e) due south (taken from other texts).
   In Cairo, according to the fifteenth century Arab historian al-Maqrizi, the qiblas
were: a) due east b) the direction of winter sunrise – which was the qibla of the Com-
panions of the Prophet in Cairo [i.e. based upon the Mosque of Amr in Fustat, built
in 641–42]; c) the mathematicians’ qibla computed by the standard formula; d) the
orientation of the Mosque of Ibn Tulun; e & g) any direction between the rising and
setting of the star of Canopus, including directly south (f). Finally, in Samarkand,
according to the eleventh century legal scholar al-Bazdawi, the qiblas were: a) due
west – used by the Hanafi legal school and corresponding to the direction in which
the main road to Mecca left Samarkand; b) the direction of winter sunset – which
Romans, Astronomy and the Qibla                                                      151

was used for the Great Mosque; c) directly southwest; d) the mathematicians qibla
computed by the standard formula; e) due south – used by the Shafi legal school
(King, 1982).
   Each major city, hence, often had a number of accepted qiblas, although it is
probable that only certain directions (or even just one) were deemed “correct” during
specific periods, or by certain individuals, such as the ulema. Over time, however,
there would develop several standard ways to determine the qibla in a particular
city (even if they were not necessarily all considered “correct”). But what was
the correlation between the sacred direction – or various qiblas – and the align-
ment of the streets and the built form of the city? That is the subject of the next
section.



The Qibla and City Structure
King (1982), besides examining many of the Arabic texts discussing the detmination
of the qibla, also recognized that many Islamic cities had orthogonal street patterns
and were laid out in one of the accepted qibla directions of a specific city. The
mosques and other Islamic buildings would be oriented in these directions as well.
For instance, the earliest section of Cairo was laid out in a more or less orthogonal
system after 969, based upon the qibla of the Companions of the Prophet (which was
about 27◦ south of east) – but which also was at a right angle to a major canal which
linked the Nile to the Red Sea. However, the Fatimids favored the mathematically
computed qibla of 37◦ south of east (= azimuth of 127◦ ), and so most mosques,
such as the Fatimid Mosque of al-Hakim and al-Azhar Mosque, became skewed
about 10◦ to the city plan. In fact, the skewing of the religious buildings within a
pre-existing street pattern in Cairo has led John Williams (1984, 39) to state “that in
no other Islamic city were so many adjustments of monument to site necessary; it is
one of the distinctive features of Cairo architecture.”
    In 1990 I published an article in Muqarnas in which I have reported on my sur-
vey of major cities in Morocco that examined the relationships between religious
architecture orientation and the city structure, evaluating the role of the qibla as
well as slope and topography in determining the alignment of streets and the city
orientation. Morocco provided an excellent case for such a study because the region
had a great number of cities which were newly established in early and medieval
Islam. Equally significant, is the fact that many of the old medinas are still existing
in Morocco.
    The contemporary determination of the correct qibla is that it is the direction of
the great circle route (i.e. the shortest distance) from each specific location to Mecca.
In Morocco this ranges from an azimuth of 97 ˚ in the northern city of Tangier to 91◦
(i.e. almost directly east) in the southern city of Marrakesh. Yet, considering only
the principal mosques and shrines of each city (usually the Jama’ or Great Mosque
[to use the translation of the commonly used French term, Grande Mosquée]) there
are a great variety in the qibla directions (taken from compass readings by the author
152                                                                         M. E. Bonine




Fig. 5 Qiblas of Major Moroccan Religious Architecture
Source: Field Data, in Bonine, 1990

in the field and adjusted to true north), and, hence, the orientations of these religious
building (Fig. 5). There is particularly a concentration of alignments in the mid-to-
late 150◦ , which may be due to establishing a similar axis as the Ka’ba, as previously
explained. Most of these alignments also belong to religious structures built during
the Almohad dynasty in the twelfth century. Another cluster of readings occur in
the 120◦ and 130◦, and these may be based upon the mathematical calculations
and tables of the astronomers, on the winter sunrise, or even simply a mid-point in
the southwest quadrant. Only in the more recent Alawite period (mid-seventeenth
century) do the directions begin to approach the contemporary “correct” readings of
the great circle routes.
    When the evidence for all the cities of Morocco are examined, it appears that
the topography often was the predominant determinant of the street pattern and city
structure. Streets (and housing) follow the slope, and if there is a change, even slight,
in the gradient the morphology of the city is altered as well. Yet, a very significant
finding about the city axes and street orientations in Morocco is that with the excep-
tion of the extremely hilly city of Fez, all of the medinas’ main axes are in a roughly
Romans, Astronomy and the Qibla                                                       153

southwest – northeast alignment, instead of being in roughly in cardinal directions.
When the predominant qiblas of the specific cities are examined, there is the close
correspondence of the qiblas with the street patterns – and hence the main axes –
in most cases. And, when the slope characteristics (where known) are considered,
these are often the same direction. Examples of the southern part of Marrakesh (as
well as the general axis of the entire city), Rabat, Salé, and particularly Taza, confirm
this correlation (see Bonine, 1990, for details). One of my principal conclusions for
the Moroccan cities was that perhaps slopes in the appropriate qibla direction(s)
were being selected for the location of many of these medieval Islamic cities. The
qibla, therefore, determined the street pattern and city axis in many of the traditional
Moroccan medinas only if the slope conditions allowed.



Tunisia: Qayrawan, the Aghlabids and City Structure
In the year 670 Qayrawan was founded in what is present-day Tunisia by the Arab
general, ‘Uqba ibn Nafi, the first Islamic city to be established in the conquest of
Ifriqiyya – or what is called today the Maghreb or Northwest Africa. Similar to the
other earliest Islamic settlements, such as Kufa, Basra, and Fustat, the mosque was
the first building to be constructed. This Great Mosque of Qayrawan, still known as
the Sidi ‘Uqba Mosque, was originally built of sun-dried bricks mixed with ashes
and was extremely modest (Hill and Golvin, 1976, 91–92). It was rebuilt in 695 and
then in the period of 724–743, during the reign of Caliph Hisham, it was enlarged
to its present dimensions. Restored once again in 774, it was then completely de-
molished except for the minaret and mihrab, and rebuilt by 862 in its basic present
plan and form (Fig. 6, Fig. 7) by the Aghlabid soverign, Ziyadat Allah (Hill and
Golvin, 1976, 91–92).
    It is perhaps possible that the Great Mosque of Qayrawan provided the model
for the alignment of the other major mosques in this region – and that this axis
influenced the orientation of the early Islamic cities of Tunisia. This might manifest
itself particularly in the Aghlabid period (800–909), when in fact many of the other
major Islamic Tunisian cities and Great Mosques were founded.
    The axis of the Great Mosque of Qarawan is aligned at an azimuth of 147◦ .
Since the currently accepted qibla (the great circle route) for the city of Qayrawan
is 110◦43’, the reason for the orientation of 147◦ must be explained – as will be
detailed below. As already mentioned, the Great Mosque was rebuilt several times
in its early history, even being completely demolished except for the mihrab and
the base of the minaret. And even if there had been slight changes in the alignment
(which may reflect why parts of the building seem not to be so perfectly rectan-
gular – note Fig. 6), these early changes would appear to have been minor. The
last major reconstruction was by the Aghlabids in the mid-ninth Century, and so
we know that the axis of 147◦ was being used at least by that century. The fact
that the Sidi ‘Uqba Mosque was the earliest mosque in the Maghreb perhaps would
have given it special reverence, and, hence, that may have precluded any attempt to
154                                                                     M. E. Bonine




Fig. 6 Plan of the Great Mosque of Qayrawan
Source: Creswell and Allan, 1989, 318


change the qibla direction. However, even if there were a change in the qibla of the
Great Mosque, we know that at least with the reconstruction by the Aghlabids that
the qibla was 147◦ , and so it is feasible that this mosque in Qayrawan still might
have served as the model for the orientation of other mosques in Tunisia.
   The Aghlabids undertook a major program of urbanism, even founding a number
of new cities in the ninth century. Most of the major mosques of Tunisia, in fact,
date from this period – although in the case of Qayrawan, some mosques were
reconstructions of buildings from earlier periods. For instance, the Great Mosques
of Sfax, Monastir, and Sousse were founded and the Great Mosque of Tunis (and
Qayrawan) were extensively rebuilt by the Aghlabids. As shown in Table 1 and
Fig. 8, except for Sousse’s qibla of 163◦ , the other four mosques’ orientations are
almost exactly the same as Qayrawan’s qibla of 147◦ . This similar sacred direction
appears to have continued to take precedence in the Tunisian region in later periods
Romans, Astronomy and the Qibla                                                            155




Fig. 7 The Great Mosque of Qayrawan
Source: Photo by the Author


as well, as evidenced by the qibla of the Great Mosque of Mahdia (this mosque
being built by the Fatimids in 916), and even Hammamet (the city and the Great
Mosque being built in the fifteenth century).
   Similar to the qibla’s influence in Moroccan cities, the sacred direction to Mecca
appears to be significant for the orientation of many of the traditional Tunisian cities.
Yet, it is more difficult to analyze the Tunisian patterns because, unlike the Morocco
study, detailed city plans, contour maps, and aerial photographs were not made avail-
able to the author. Nevertheless, some preliminary observations and conclusions can
be made. Each of the major cities will be discussed in detail in the next section.
   Qayrawan: Since the Great Mosque of Qayrawan has been postulated as the pos-
sible model for the direction of the qibla in the Tunisian region, this city must first be
examined. Unfortunately, the medina of Qayrawan shows little close relationship to


Table 1 Qiblas of Great Mosques in Tunisia
City             Building              Period                       Qibla      “Correct Qibla”
                                                                        ◦
Qayrawan         Great Mosque          670/rebuilt by               147        110◦ 43’
                   (Sidi ‘Uqba)          Aghlabids 862
Tunis            Great Mosque          Umayyada 732/rebuilt         145◦       112◦ 37’
                   (Zaytuna)             by Aghlabids
                                         856–863
Sfax             Great Mosque          Aghlabids 849                147◦       109◦ 50’
Sousse           Great Mosque          Aghlabids 9th c.             163◦       111◦ 31’
Monastir         Great Mosque          Aghlabids 9th c.             147◦       111◦ 41’
Mahdia           Great Mosque          Fatimids 916/921             146◦       111◦ 28’
Hammamet         Great Mosque          Hafsids? 15th c.             147◦       112◦ 28’
Source: Qibla directions are azimuths taken with a Suunto optical reading compass in the field.
Magnetic declination in Tunisia in summer 1985 was approximately 1◦ west of true north, and
true north readings have been drived by subtracting 1◦ from the compass reading. Directions are
expressed in azimuths from true north. The “correct” Qibla is the great circle route to Mecca.
156                                                                        M. E. Bonine




Fig. 8 Qiblas of Great Mosques in Tunisia
Source: Compass Readings in Field Survey by the Author, 1985


the orientation of the mosque (Fig. 9). The building is located at one end of the Old
City and even though there are a number of major streets that are somewhat orthog-
onal to the axis of the mosque, a major section of the city also is oriented at about
45◦ to that structure. It is known that the Hillalian invasions of the eleventh century
destroyed many cities in North Africa, and when “great towns such as Qayrawan
were reduced to the status of villages” (Hutt, 1977, 19). It may be that a more or-
thogonal morphology and street pattern were lost at that time, or as Donati (1989,
42) has speculated, the city east of the mosque may have been swept away by the
annual floods of the wadis there. In any case, today there is little relationship of the
orientation of the Great Mosque and the pattern of the urban structure in Qayrawan.
   Tunis: The medina of Tunis shows considerably more correlation of the qibla with
the orientation of the city. The Aghlabids built – or rebuilt – in 856–863 the Great
Mosque in Tunis, known as the Zaytuna Mosque (Mosque of the Olive Tree), maybe
upon the foundations of an earlier monument which probably was a church or a ribat
Romans, Astronomy and the Qibla                                                       157

(fortified convent or sanctuary). The Zaytuna Mosque has a qibla measured at 145◦ ,
although similar to the Qayrawan Great Mosque, parts of the structure also are not
exactly rectangular to one another (Fig. 10), which means probably that in reconstruc-
tions there might have been some minor adjustments in alignment. However, in Tunis
the major streets are parallel or at right angles to the main qibla of the Zaytuna Mosque,
especially around the mosque itself (see Fig. 10). And, except for a few sections, the
entire medina of Tunis is basically this same orientation (Fig. 11). The qibla of other
religious buildings are basically aligned as well in the same direction as the Zaytuna
Mosque – and as the orientation of the orthogonal street network. Such a pattern also
means that there are many rather straight streets in the historic medina (Fig. 12).
    Sfax: The city of Sfax presents one of the most intriguing cases. This medina
and the Great Mosque were built in the ninth century by the Aghlabids. Although
the Great Mosque was restored in the tenth and eleventh Centuries and reduced in
size, it was enlarged again to its original size in the eighteenth century (Hill and
Golvin, 1976, 106). The qibla of the Great Mosque is the familiar 147◦ and the
orientation of the city is in the same direction (Fig. 13).




Fig. 9 Plan of the Medina of Qayrawan
Source: Jeridi, 1984, Frontispiece
158                                                                        M. E. Bonine




Fig. 10 The Great Mosque of Tunis in its Setting
Source: Lezine, 1971, 156

    The rather extreme orthogonal street pattern of Sfax, in fact, is so regular (for an
Islamic city), that some scholars assume that Islamic Sfax was built on the exact site
of the Roman city of Tapurura (e.g. see Van der Meerschen, 1972, 6, 23). Although
it is certainly known that Sfax is at least near that ancient Roman city, so far there
has been no definitive archaeological evidence to verify absolutely that Sfax is built
on the same location of that city.
    However, the main axis of Sfax is the same – almost exact – direction as the
qibla of its Great Mosque – which, as already stressed, is the same direction as the
qiblas of the Great Mosques of Qayrawan, Tunis, and many other Tunisian cities.
Although Sfax might have been built upon ancient Taparura because the ancient
town (or its main avenues) just happened to be aligned exactly in that direction (of
the qibla), this great coincidence still must be explained (see below). Was Islamic
Romans, Astronomy and the Qibla                                                  159




Fig. 11 Plan of the Medina of Tunis
Source: Lezine, 1971, 144


Sfax established anew by the Aghlabids as an Islamic city, and was the alignment of
the orthogonal system of streets and housing determined by the accepted direction
of the qibla – that direction which was first used or at least had become accepted by
the Aghlabid period in Qayrawan? The fact that the topography of Sfax is quite flat
would also lend itself to the evolution of a rather regular and orthogonal morphology
and with many straight streets (Fig. 14), analogous to some of the cities in Morocco
or Iran (Bonine, 1979, 1990).
   Sousse: Although by the mid-ninth century Sousse was fortified and the Great
Mosque built by the Alghabids, the town had long been an important port – of the
Romans and then of the Byzantines. The qibla of Sousse’s main mosque (163◦) is the
only Great Mosque (of those surveyed in Tunisia) which was not basically the same
160                                                                        M. E. Bonine

Fig. 12 A Medina Street in
Tunis
Source: Photo by the Author




direction as the Great Mosque of Qayrawan (i.e. 147◦ ). Also, several other mosques
and the small ribat in Sousse had qibla’s of almost exactly south (180◦ ), including one
building (Bu Fatata) with a qibla of 188◦ – i.e. slightly towards the west!
    Although a number of major streets in Sousse are approximately at a right angle
to the Great Mosque, part of the city, and especially the southern section, is aligned
almost north to south (or slightly to the southwest) (Fig. 15). The irregularity of the
orientation of the smaller religious buildings in this case may have evolved in a pre-
existing (Punic or Roman?) city structure, part of which was in cardinal directions.
A somewhat irregular topography in Sousse, similar to the situation in Fez, also may
have contributed to the irregularity in streets and qiblas – and, hence, in the building
alignments (Fig. 16).
    Monastir: Originally founded as a rabat in 796, Monastir was a Punic and Roman
town earlier – although perhaps not at the exact same location. The Great Mosque
was built next to the rabat in the ninth century by the Aghlabids. The qibla of the
Great Mosque is, once again, the familiar 147 ˚ , and most of the other smaller
mosques (and the rabat) were quite close to that direction as well. Although the
relationship of qiblas and the street orientations were not examined in detail, the
general street pattern of Monastir is rather orthogonal and mostly in the same align-
ment as the qibla of the Great Mosque(Fig. 17).
Romans, Astronomy and the Qibla                                                  161




Fig. 13 Plan of the Medina of Sfax



    Mahdia: Mahdia was founded in 913 by the Fatimid ruler ‘Ubaid Allah as the
first major capital in North Africa. The Great Mosque (Fig. 18) was built in 916 and
the qibla measured as 146◦. The city was built on a small strategic peninsula which
was fortified (and which had been used earlier by the Phoenicians and Romans).
Although only in one corner of the peninsula, originally an avenue went from the
mosque to several palaces (Fig. 19a). This is a natural axis along the peninsula,
and so later streets and housing follow the same orientation (Fig. 19b). Although
the streets are approximately at a right angle to the axis of the Great Mosque, it
is more reasonable in this instance to see the pattern as perhaps a response to the
orientation and topography of the peninsula (Fig. 19c) rather than as any influence
of the alignment of the mosque.
    Hammamet: Finally, it is interesting to note that Hammamet, which was built in
the fifteenth century, has a qibla also of 147◦ for the Great Mosque (Fig. 20) (which
was built in the fifteenth century as well). And, in this case the entire city is not
only extremely orthogonal (Fig. 21, Fig. 22), but also it is aligned in the direction
of the qibla of the Great Mosque (and other religious buildings). Hence, even at
this later date the direction to Mecca used by Qayrawan and the Aghlabids was still
influencing the qibla and hence the alignment and structure of Tunisian cities. Yet,
we still have not explained that orientation – to which we now turn.
162                                                                     M. E. Bonine

Fig. 14 A Medina Street in
Sfax
Source: Photo by the Author




Tunisian Qiblas and Islamic Urban Structure: A Roman Legacy?
Tunisia has long been a crossroads, at the juncture of the western and eastern
Mediterranean basins and close to Sicily and Italy. Before the coming of Islam,
this region was part of the Punic, Roman, and then Byzantine empires, as well
as being influenced by Vandals, Berber kingdoms and various other political units
and coalitions over the centuries and millennia. Carthage was once one of the great
cities of the Mediterranean world, and numerous other towns, especially port cities,
were part of these empires. Although a pre-Islamic town in some instances may lay
underneath an Islamic city, and, hence, influence the structure and orientation, as
in Sousse (Roman Hadrumetum) and perhaps Sfax or even Tunis, there is another
possible influence which may have been more significant in determining the orien-
tation of these Tunisian Islamic cities – and hence also the direction of the qibla.
This factor is the rural survey of the landscape by the Romans, called the Roman
centuriation system.
    As the Roman Empire expanded, in many frontier areas an extensive land survey
was conducted to establish colonies as agricultural settlements, and for the divi-
sion of their allocated cultivated lands. Such surveys often divided the land into
squares with a side of 2,400 Roman feet (705.10 meters) and containing an area of
200 iugera (c. 50.4 hectares), which were called coloniae or centuriae (centuries),
Romans, Astronomy and the Qibla        163




Fig. 15 Plan of the Medina of Sousse
Source: Lezine, 1971, 14
164                                      M. E. Bonine




Fig. 16 The Medina of Sousse
Source: Photo by the Author




Fig. 17 Plan of the Medina of Monastir
Source: Lezine, 1971, 130
Romans, Astronomy and the Qibla                                                    165




Fig. 18 The Great Mosque of Mahdia
Source: Photo by the Author



because they theoretically contained 100 heredia (“inherited areas”), consisting of
two iugera (“yoke areas”) each, which was the size of the plot usually given to the
colonists. It is this cadastral survey of land into these squares which is known as
centuriation (Dilke, 1971).
    Evidence of centuriation has been found in northern Italy, France, Netherlands,
Great Britain, and a few other areas. In North Africa it appears that mainly Tunisia
(and part of eastern Algeria) were subjected to these surveys. In fact, the centuri-
ation in Tunisia was rather vast (Fig. 23), and has been the focus of extensive
research for many decades, mainly by French scholars. Such work has included
the detailed Atlas des Centuriations Romaines de Tunisie, published in the early
1950s and showing the centuriation system (identified in aerial photographs) over-
printed on existing 1:50,000 maps. What is apparent is that there are large areas
with the same orientation, although the directions sometime vary from region to
region. Either squares or rectangles will comprise a particular system (e.g. Fig. 24,
Fig. 25). The original Roman province of Africa began in 146 BC, when Carthage
was conquered and razed to the ground, and centuriation began in Tunisia soon
after that time. By the late second century BCE about 15,000 sq. km. had been
divided into regular squares (Dilke, 1971, 156). Extensive new centuriation oc-
curred in AD 29–30, including central Tunisia, carried out by the third legion of
Augusta.
    The orientations of the centuriation systems are not in cardinal directions, but,
instead, the main axis, the decumanus maximus, is oriented to the southwest, with the
cardo maximus at a right angle to the decumanus (although these two axes get switched
in some instances) (Fig. 26). There are slight variations to the directions of the main
systems, and one, the centuriation centered on Acholla, has a rather different orienta-
tion (Note Fig. 26). Several French scholars have examined the Tunisian centuriation,
particularly Chevallier (1954) and Trousset (1977, 1978, 1997). Some of the coastal
centuriation has been explained as evolving at a right angle to the coast, although a
number of the main systems are oriented to face either sunrise at the summer solstice
166                                                                         M. E. Bonine




Fig. 19 Plans of the Medina of Mahdia
Source: Lezine, 1968, 5, 6, 47



or sunrise at the winter solstice (this latter orientation often being the direction of
the cardo maximus, and so the decumanus maximus would be 90◦ to that direction).
The centuriation at Acholla, for instance, is oriented to the summer solstice (119◦),
as Trousset, 1977, notes – although that system is also at right angles to the sea coast,
which may be the main reason for the orientation. For many of the major systems, such
as the one which begins at Jabel Bou el Hanech (Fig. 26), the cardo maximus is oriented
to the sunrise at the winter solstice (60◦ at about latitude 37◦ [Tunis, Carthage] to 61◦
at about latitude 35◦ [Sfax]). Hence, the direction of the other axis, the decumanus
maximus, will be 150◦ to 151◦ for these latitudes.
    Now, let us return to the directions of the qibla of the major mosques of specific
cities, as previously discussed. While assuming a level horizon, Qayrawan, located
at 35◦ 41’, will have sunrise at winter solstice at about 60.7◦ , giving the right angle
Romans, Astronomy and the Qibla                                                  167




Fig. 19 (continued)


direction as 150.7◦, and as noted above, the qibla of the Great Mosque in Qayrawan
was measured at 147◦ . Sfax, located at 34◦ 44’ N, will have the winter sunrise at
about 61.1◦ and the other axis 151.1◦ (and the qibla measured 147◦ ), while Tunis
at 36◦ 48’ N will have winter sunrise at about 60.4◦ and 150.4◦ at the right angle
(and the qibla measured 145◦ ). Similar close correlations of the winter sunrise axis
and the qibla occur for Mahdia, Monastir, and Hammamet, with only Sousse being
rather different, as previously mentioned.
   As previously mentioned, King has noted that according to the medieval Arabic
sources mosques were often laid out toward the winter sunrise, because it was thought




Fig. 20 The Grand Mosque of Hammamet
Source: Photo by the Author
168                                      M. E. Bonine




Fig. 21 Plan of the Medina of Hammamet




Fig. 22 The Medina of Hammamet
Source: Photo by the Author
Romans, Astronomy and the Qibla                                                    169




Fig. 23 The Roman Centuriation System in Tunisia
Source: Caillsemer and Chevallier, 1954



that this would make their qibla walls parallel to the north west wall of the Ka’ba
(i.e. facing the northwest wall of the Ka’ba). Mecca at 21◦ 29’ N would have a win-
ter sunrise of 115.3◦ with an even horizon (although actually it is quite mountain-
ous around the holy city). Hence, even though in Tunisia the winter solstice is at
a rather different angle than at the Ka’ba, for the faithful attempting to follow this
particular prescription (i.e. direction), the winter solstice might still be considered
a proper orientation. However, the 60◦ –61◦ direction of the winter solstice is to the
northeast quadrant and not to the southeast, which would mean that it would be the
wrong quadrant in any case. So, why would the mosques in Tunisia be at a right
170                                                                       M. E. Bonine




Fig. 24 The Roman Centuriation System at Acholla
Source: Caillsemer and Chevallier, 1954


angle to this winter solstice direction? Since many of the Roman centuriation systems
are also in the axis direction of the sunrise of the winter solstice, could this mean
that these Roman cadasters might have been significant as well? The fact that the
directions of the qiblas of the major religious structures are so consistent and follow
the centuriation direction, also might lend some credence to the role of centuriation.
However, is centuriation determining the qibla? – or is it determining the settlement
pattern and orientation, within which a later mosque would be built and hence have a
particular direction for the qibla? Now we turn to an examination of the relationship
of the Roman centuriation with the settlement morphology and orientation.
    The connection between centuriation and settlement form certainly has been
recognized by several scholars. For instance, Soyer (1976) has shown how the




Fig. 25 The Roman Centuriation System near Tunis and Carthage
Source: Caillsemer and Chevllier, 1954
Romans, Astronomy and the Qibla                             171




Fig. 26 Axes of the Major Centuriation Systems in Tunisia
Source: Trousset, 1978, Fig. 6
172                                                                       M. E. Bonine




Fig. 27 Centuriation and Settlement Morphology in Western Algeria
Source: Soyer, 1976, Fig. 23



morphology and orientation of some settlements in eastern Algeria have been deter-
mined by the Roman cadastres (Fig. 27). Within Tunisia the first consideration is to
examine Qayrawan itself. Unfortunately, we are again disappointed with the lack of
evidence for the earliest major Islamic city in the Maghreb. At least according to the
Atlas des Centuriations Romaines de Tunisie, centuriation has not been found in the
immediate vicinity of Qayrawan. However, since some systems have been identified
in other areas of Tunisia which do not appear in the atlas, it still may be possible
that centuriation had been present and influenced the layout of Qayrawan – and the
orientation of the Great Mosque. (But until such evidence is forthcoming, Qayrawan
will remain the model city which cannot be properly explained.)
   Tunis, on the other hand, provides an interesting and most relevant case study for
this papr. Woodford (1990), for instance, discusses the evolution of Tunis, which
includes an examination of the centuriation system and Roman Tunis. He remarks
that “in the 1920’s, the French noted the correspondence of street axes in the Tu-
nis medina with those of the rural colonia, but undertook no studies to determine
whether they related only to the rural colonia, or whether they could have formed
part of an urban layout” (1990, 56). He then shows that the present street orientations
are aligned along the decumanus and the cardo, and that the present street intervals
correspond to intervals of 240 Roman feet (Fig. 28). He also shows that the Zaytuna
Mosque fits into a square which is 240 by 240 Roman feet (Fig. 29).
Romans, Astronomy and the Qibla                                                  173




Fig. 28 Roman Street Intervals in Tunis
Source: Woodford, 1990, Fig. 18


   Woodford postulates that Islamic Tunis was built over a Roman city and not just
the rural cadastre system. This reasoning is due to the continued existence of the
earlier Roman rectangular modules, which measure 1,440 by 1,752 Roman feet.
These are then divided into insulae or street blocks of 96 by 240 feet, with the long
side in the direction of the decumanus (Fig. 30) (1990, 56–61). Although Woodford
notes that the Zaytuna Mosque (the Mosque of the Olive Tree) was probably built
174                                                     M. E. Bonine




Fig. 29 The Grand Mosque of Tunis and the Roman Block
Source: Woodford, 1990, Fig. 19




Fig. 30 The Morphology of Tunis and the Roman Blocks
Source: Woodford, 1990, Fig. 21
Romans, Astronomy and the Qibla                                                   175




Fig. 31 Tunis and the Legacy of the Roman Street System
Source: Woodford, 1990, Fig. 20



upon an earlier church which had been dedicated to St. Olive, he does not ever
comment upon the qibla orientation which has resulted from this Roman cadastre
system. The alignment of the Zeytuna Mosque as well as its dimensions seem to
confirm the influence of the Roman cadastre (and even though the mosque is not
exactly orthogonal, it is only slightly askew and the qibla actually closely parallels
the direction of the Roman decumanus and the main streets (see Fig. 10). In fact, the
major streets of the medina are all basically orthogonal and follow the centuriation,
as Woodford has noted (Fig. 31). Daoulatli (1976, 31), on the other hand, attempts
to explain the orientation of the major streets in the medina as a consequence of
the direction of the principal external roads (but, actually, whose orientation would
176                                                                        M. E. Bonine

have been highly influenced by the Roman centuriation). The orthogonal alignment
of fields and roads near the medina, as near Sebkhet Es Sedjoumi, for instance,
also seems to indicate a pre-existing Roman cadastre, although the orientation does
change slightly in certain areas, probably due to the slope.
    The medina of Sfax is also quite orthogonal, as previously discussed. The Islamic
city is certainly built upon a Roman cadastre, although whether it is built upon a rural
centuriation or upon the Roman city of Tapurura (and hence similar to the situation
of Tunis as postulated by Woodford), remains to be determined. Sfax actually does
not appear as part of the Atlas des Centuriations Romaines de Tunisie, being just
south of the most southern centuriation system shown. Yet, it is relevant to note that
the land divisions around Sfax are very orthogonal, and are oriented in the same
direction as the medina itself. And, similar to Tunis, the orientation of the Great
Mosque of Sfax also appears to have been determined by a pre-existing Roman
cadastral survey (and/or perhaps Roman city).
    As a last example, Hammamet not only shows the same orientation and extreme
regularity, as previously mentioned, but also it has many blocks of housing which
are the exact same widths (Fig. 21). If Hammamet was indeed founded only in the
fifteenth century as a new city, it nevertheless must have been built upon the legacy
of a Roman centuriation. Hence, once again the orientation of the mosque (and
hence the qibla) appear to have been determined by the earlier Roman system.


Conclusion

The patterns which have manifested themselves in this brief examination are in-
triguing indeed. We have seen that the qibla for the Great Mosques of a number of
Tunisian cities are basically the same direction (except for Sousse), and that this
direction is 90◦ of sunrise at the winter solstice. Sunrise at the winter solstice is
also the orientation of the axes of many of the earlier Roman centuriation systems.
When the evidence of a Roman cadastral survey is found associated with these
cities, it then appears that the qibla and the Islamic city structure has therefore been
determined by the pre-existing Roman system.
    Yet, there needs to be more investigations to confirm some of these notions and
patterns. One needs to look for evidence of centuriation in the vicinity of Qayrawan.
Careful measurements of Sfax and other cities need to be done to determine what
Roman system (centuriation or Roman city) might have influenced the later urban
structure and orientation. More settlements – and qiblas – need to be examined in
other areas of Tunisia (and eastern Algeria). The role of the Aghlabids, who built
so many of the main Islamic Tunisian cities (and the Great Mosques) needs to be
better understood. In any case, it does appear that, unlike Morocco and many other
areas of the Islamic Middle East, the ancient Roman centuriation system indeed may
have determined the qibla and the orientation of mosques, as well as the structure
and alignment of the traditional cities themselves in Tunisia. And the centuriation
systems were often laid out based upon astronomical calculations. Further work is
needed to confirm and elaborate upon these intriguing patterns and relationships.
Romans, Astronomy and the Qibla                                                                177

References
Bonine, Michael E. 1979. “The Morphogenesis of Iranian Cities.” Annals of the Association of
    American Geographers 69: 208–224.
      . 1990. “The Sacred Direction and City Structure: A Preliminary Analysis of Islamic Cities of
    Morocco,” Muqarnas: An Annual on Islamic Art and Architecture 7: 50–72
Caillsemer, A. and Chevallier, R. 1954. Atlas des centuriations romaines de Tunisie. Paris : I.G.N.
    Chevaliier, Raymond. 1976. Roman Roads. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Cresswell, K.A.C. and Allan, James W. 1989. A Short Account of Early Muslim Architecture.
    Aldershot, England: Scholar Press (Revised and enlarged edition of 1958).
Dilke, O.A.W. 1971. The Roman Land Surveyors: An Introduction to the Agrimensores. New York:
    Barnes & Noble.
Daoulatli, Abdelaziz. 1976. Tunis sous les Hafsides: Evolution urbaine et activite architecturale.
    Tunis : Institut national d’archaeologie et d’art Bibliotheque archeologique, Tome 3.
Donati, Paola Jervis. 1989. “Kairouan.” Environmental Design: Journal of the Islamic Environ-
    mental Research Centre. No. 8 (1–2): 36–53.
Ehlers, Eckart. 1983. “Sfax/Tunesien: Dualistische Strukturen in der orientalisch-Islamischen
    tadt.” Erdkunde 37: 81–96.
Ferrar, Michael J. And Richardson, Alan. 2003. The Roman Survey of Britain. Oxford: John and
    Erica Hedges Ltd, British Archaeological Reports, BAR Series 359.
Hawkins, Gerald S. And King, David A. 1982. “On the Orientation of the Ka’ba,” Journal for the
    History of Astronomy 13: 101–109.
Hill, Derek and Golvin, Lucien. 1976. Islamic Architecture in North Africa. Hamden, Conn.: Ar-
    chon Books.
Hutt, Antony. 1977. Islamic Architecture: North Africa. London: Scorpion Publications, Ltd.
Golvin, Lucien. 1974. Essai sur l’architecture religieuse musulmane. Paris: Éditions Klincksieck,
    Archéologie Méditerranéenne, V, Tome 3.
Jeridi, Ameir. 1984. Le Kairouan du Visiteur. Qayrawan : Presses de l’Imprimerie Labidi.
Kessler, Christel M. 1984. “Mecca-Oriented Urban Architecture in Mamluk Cairo : The Madrasa-
    Mausoleum of Sultan Sha’ban II,” in In Quest of an Islamic Humanism: Arabic and Islamic
    Studies in Memory of Mohamed al-Nowaihi, ed. by A. H. Green. Cairo: The American Univer-
    sity in Cairo Press, pp. 97–108.
King, David A. 1982. “ Astronomical Alignments in Medieval Islamic Religious Architecture, ”
    Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences 385 : 303–312.
      . 1984. “Architecture and Astronomy: The Ventilators of Medieval Cairo and their Secrets,”
    Journal of the American Oriental Society 104: 97–133.
      . 1985. “The Sacred Direction in Islam: A Study of the Interaction of Religion and Science in
    the Middle Ages,” Interdisciplinary Science Reviews 10: 315–328.
      . 1986.“The Earliest Islamic Mathematical Methods and Tables for Finding the Direc-
    tions of Mecca,” Zeitschrift für Geschichte der Arabisch-Islamischen Wissenschaften. 3:
    82–149.
      . 1995. ,,The Orientation of Medieval Islamic Religious Architecture and Cities.” JHA 26:
    253–274.
      . 1999. World-Maps for Finding the Direction and Distance to Mecca: Innovation and Tradi-
    tion in Islamic Science. Leiden: Brill.
Lézine, Alexandre. 1968. Mahdiya. Tunis: Societé tunisienne de diffusion.
      . 1971. Deux villes d’Ifriqiya : Sousse, Tunis - études d’archéologie d’uranisme de
    démograpie. Paris : Librairie Orientaliste Paul Geuthner.
Micare, Ludovico. 1989. “ Il rilievo architettonico della median de Hammamet (Tunisia), ” Storia
    della citta (International Review of Town Planning History) 46 :81–84.
Ørsted, Peter. 1998. “ Aménagement et dynamique territoriale dans le bassin de Segermès (Tunisie)
    á l’époque romaine, ” Antiquités Africaines 34 : 157–173.
Peyras, Jean. 1983. “Paysages agraires et centuriations dans le basin de l’oued Tine (Tunisie du
    Nord), ” Antiquitiés Africaines 19 : 209–253.
178                                                                                    M. E. Bonine

Sauvaget, Jean. 1934. “Esquisse d’une histoire de la ville de Damas,” Revue des Etudes Islamiques
   8 : 421–480.
Soyer, Jacqueline. 1973. “Les cadastres anciens de la région de Saint-Donat,” Antiquitiés Africaines
   7 : 275–296.
    . 1976. “Les centuriations romaines en Algérie orientale, ” Antiquités Africaines 10: 107–180.
Trousset, Pol. 1977. “Nouvelles observations sur la centuriation romaine á l’est d’El Jem” Antiq-
   uités Africaines 11: 175–207.
    . 1978. “Les bornes du Bled Segui. Nouveaux aperçus sur la centuriation romaine du Sud
   tunisien,” Antiquités Africaines 12: 125–177.
    . 1997. “Les centuriations de Tunisie et l’orientation solaire,” Antiquités Africaines 33:
   95–107.
Van der Meerschen, Michel. 1972. “La medina de Sfax: Enquete preliminaire a sa regneration,”
   Monumentum (Louvain/Leuven) 8: 3–32.
Williams, John Alden. 1984. “Urbanization and Monument Construction in Mamluk Cairo,”
   Muqarnas: An Annual on Islamic Art and Architecture 2: 33–45.
Woodford, J.S. 1990. The City of Tunis: Evolution of an Urban System. Cambridgeshire, England:
   Middle East and North African Studies Press.
The Timbuktu Astronomy Project
A Scientific Exploration of the Secrets of the Archives
of Timbuktu

Rodney Thebe Medupe, Brian Warner, Shamil Jeppie, Salikou Sanogo,
Mohammed Maiga, Ahmed Maiga, Mamadou Dembele, Drissa Diakite,
Laya Tembely, Mamadou Kanoute, Sibiri Traore, Bernard Sodio
and Sharron Hawkes




Abstract The ancient city of Timbuktu was the main centre for commerce and
scholarship in West Africa from the 13th century until the 17th century. Books were
bought from North Africa and other centres of Islamic learning, and local scholars
also wrote many books on astronomy, medicine, mathematics, literature, law and
islam. Scholarship peaked during the 16th and 17th century but declined gradu-
ally until the 19th century. Our project aims to study the ancient manuscripts from
Timbuktu in order to search for astronomy in them. The main aim of the project
is to document our research and use it to attract African youth into science and
technology by appealing to their heritage. This paper outlines progress made since
the inception of the project in 2006.


Introduction
The city of Timbuktu was the major commercial and intellectual centre of the Mali
and Songhay empires. Scholarship in Timbuktu peaked in the 15th and 16th cen-
turies due to the tremendous support from the Songhay emperor Askia Mohammed,
and its increased link with North Africa and Egypt in particular. Fabulously wealthy,
Timbuktu’s commercial success created fertile ground for an important African cen-
tre of learning where scholars of religion, arts and sciences flourished. During this
period, thousands of manuscripts were commissioned and meticulously executed by
Timbuktu academics. A thriving book trade existed with other parts of the Islamic
world. This resulted in various manuscripts being imported, including exclusive
copies of the Koran for wealthy families.


Rodney Thebe Medupe
Astronomy Department, University of Cape Town
E-mail: thebe@saao.ac.za


J. Holbrook et al. (eds.), African Cultural Astronomy – Current Archaeoastronomy
and Ethnoastronomy Research in Africa.     C Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2008   179
180                                                                    R. T. Medupe et al.

    For three hundred years, Timbuktu flourished until being invaded by Morocco
in the 1590’s. Although the culture of scholarship continued until late 19th cen-
tury, the golden era for Timbuktu scholarship was undoubtedly the 16th century.
Fortunately, a treasure trove of hundreds of thousands of manuscripts survived the
gradual decline of the city – safeguarded by descendants of the ancient scholars and
scribes – many lying untouched in trunks or buried deep in the thick mud walls
of mosques for generations. There is one public library, the Ahmed Baba library,
and several private libraries in the region of Timbuktu. Only eight of these private
libraries are accessible to study. Only one of them, the Mama Haidara library has
catalogued its manuscripts. The Ahmed Baba library has a collection of over 20,000
manuscripts, only nine thousand of these are catalogued. The contents of these
manuscripts are largely a mystery and the documents are in grave danger of being
lost and damaged before their contents are revealed.
    The Timbuktu manuscripts are part of a much larger collection of Islamic writ-
ings found throughout much of West Africa (Hunwick & O’Fahey 2002). An interest
in the study of Islamic writings in West Africa by Western scholars goes as far back
as 1900. These early researchers mainly concentrated on the history of the region
and literature as written by the region scholars. The Institute for Studies of Islamic
Thought in Africa (ISITA) headed by Professor Hunwick, has also used some of the
manuscripts to study the history of Timbuktu, and the biographies of some of the
remarkable scholars such as Ahmed Baba and his mentor, Muhammad Baghayogho
(Hunwick 2001). Hunwick (1999) translates the works of one of the early Timbuktu
historians, Abd al-Rahman al-Sa’di (died. 1655). His historical writings cover the
history of Timbuktu and Jenne from the twelfth and mid-seventeenth century. More
recently, one of our research team members, Shamil Jeppie, has initiated a study
into the law content of the Timbuktu manuscripts.
    As far as we know, no studies have been made on the science content of the
manuscripts from Timbuktu or any other part of Africa where ancient manuscripts
are found. For example, Hunwick & O’Fahey 2002 mentions the thirty two astron-
omy manuscripts that have been identified in the libraries of the Al-Furqan foun-
dation in the Republic of Ghana, but they make no mention of any detailed studies
of them. We therefore proposed a pilot project titled “The Project into the Scientific
Contents of the Timbuktu Manuscripts” to initiate the first ever research by scholars
(scientists and historians) into the science content of the Timbuktu manuscripts.
Initially we will focus on the astronomy content, but as we develop and optimize
research techniques and methodology we hope to expand our area of research to
cover other areas of science.
    The primary goals of this research are to investigate the extent of the participation
and contribution of African astronomers to Medieval Islamic scientific culture. We
are interested in promoting the role played by Africans in Islamic Science in order
to encourage young Africans today to pursue careers in the fields of Astronomy,
Science and Technology.
    Our main objective is to build a complete picture of the status of scientific studies
and research during the Mali and Songhay empires so as to document the con-
tribution of Africans to the development of science in the world. This project is
The Timbuktu Astronomy Project                                                     181

multi-disciplinary, therefore the results of the investigation may have bearing on
other fields of study such as more illumination on the history and nature of the
interaction of Sub-Saharan Africa with the rest of the Islamic world.

The Scientific Investigation

Islamic Astronomy at the Time of the Mali and Songhay Empires
An interesting question to address concerns the possibility of a sharing of scientific
ideas between the known centres of medieval Islamic science such as Baghdad and
West Africa. Islamic science flourished during the period between the 1200 and the
700 years ago. During that period, it is believed that most research in astronomy in
the world took place in the Islamic Spain, North Africa and the Middle East. The
knowledge resulting from this era went on to benefit European scientists during the
time of European Renaissance (see Saliba 1999). The research involved a combi-
nation of the translating ancient Greek science manuscripts, and original works by
Medieval Islamic scientists.
   In the Islamic world, research in astronomy was driven by two main religious
practices; firstly, the requirement for Muslims to pray facing Mecca and to orient
their mosques in the direction of Mecca. Secondly, the need to determine proper
times for prayers at sunrise, noon, afternoon, sunset and evening. Practical solutions
to both of these problems require the use of trigonometry. Ideas on Trigonometry
were first used by ancient Egyptians and Babylonians, but was developed into an
area of mathematics by ancient Greeks (Adamek et al. 2005). Hipparchus is con-
sidered the father of trigonometry (Heath 1981). Ptolemy’s trigonometric solutions
were correct but his methods were too cumbersome. Muslim astronomers devised
easier solutions by presenting trigonometry as is known today. The medieval Islamic
astronomers also improved on the astrolabe, an instrument that was used to predict
positions of stars and planets (King 1986; Saliba 1991). For further reading: Gingerich
(1986) gives a brief but easy to read account of the history of Islamic astronomy.

The Investigations
We are interested in exploring the Timbuktu scientists understanding of several basic
astronomy principles. Such as if knew that the earth was round, and whether their
view of the universe was heliocentric. We also want to determine if Timbuktu as-
tronomers used any instruments to study the positions of stars, and their perception
of transient astronomical events such as comets, eclipses and shooting stars. Finally
we want to determine their knowledge of mathematics and whether they used it in
their study of astronomy. We plan to search their records of astronomical events for
supernovae as well as other transient events mentioned above.
   The answers to these questions alone are very interesting, however, the full extent
of the information to be found in the thousands of documents lying unexplored and
undiscovered can only be guessed at.
182                                                                            R. T. Medupe et al.

Project Feasibility
The possibility of finding information about astronomy in the archives is based
on the following points. First, until quite recently, the stars in the night sky
dominated many aspects of human life, providing vital information on the time,
changing seasons, navigation and complementing spiritual beliefs (Snedegar 2000;
Prins 1961). The importance and extent of people’s dependence on astronomy
and their sky knowledge is quite likely to be contained in the archives of
Timbuktu.
    Secondly, Timbuktu traded extensively with Muslim traders from North Africa
and the Middle East. In the previous sections of this paper, we have shown that
from the 8th century until the 13th century, Muslim astronomers took over from the
ancient Greeks as some of the most accurate and innovative mathematicians and
astronomers in the world. Through the book trade and regular interaction between
these cultures it is quite feasible that they shared knowledge about astronomy and
mathematics.
    In addition, there have been a number of important indicators of the extent of
the astronomical information in the archives and as our research intensifies, fasci-
nating and enticing pieces of information continues to emerge which indicate that
not only will we be successful within the parameters of our research objectives
but also that astronomical and scientific knowledge may have been more extensive
than ever previously imagined. A casual look at the entries of the Ahmed Baba
library catalogues indicates the existence of 37 manuscripts that deal with topics on
astronomy and astrology. We also found 27 articles in the Mama Haidara library.
While we are more interested in the astronomy, articles on astrology will be very
useful as a window into the ancient Malian view of the night sky, their cosmology,
and their divination practices. More importantly, we also found articles on the re-
lations between Islamic and non-Islamic calendars, a text on the “introduction to
astronomy” and on calculating time. As we have shown before, time calculations
were based on knowing trigonometry and knowing the position of stars accurately
(King 1986).
    Finally, there is evidence of the recordings of some astronomical events such
as the one below of the meteor shower of August 1583 recorded by a Songhay
historian, Mahmud Al Kati (see Hunwick 2001):
   “In the year 991 [1583] in God’s month of Rajab the Goodly [August 1583] after half the
   night had passed, stars flew around the sky as if fire had been kindled in the whole sky –
   east, west, north and south. It became a mighty flame lighting up the earth, and people were
   extremely disturbed about that. It continued until after dawn.
   Recorded by the humble servant of his Lord, Alfafi Kati Mahmud . . . ”

    The process of revealing the contents of the Timbuktu manuscripts involves iden-
tifying the relevant manuscripts and digitizing them to avoid damage during trans-
portation. There is already a programme for digitizing manuscripts in the Ahmed
Baba library. Thus, once we have identified manuscripts of interest from their cat-
alogue, we submit request for the digitized copies to be sent to the two teams for
The Timbuktu Astronomy Project                                                              183

study. Two Arabic-to-English translators have been employed on a full-time basis to
work on the manuscripts. The translated works are then studied by the Malian and
South African teams.

Some Interesting Results
We report on preliminary findings of our research in 2006. We have translated over
15 manuscripts into English. They vary in size from two pages up to 100 pages long.
Unfortunately many have missing pages, which means we do not know their authors
nor their origins. We think we know the origins of the two papers we briefly discuss
below.

Geocentric Model of the Universe in 1700s Timbuktu
This manuscript, written in 1723, is a copy of a commentary by Abul Abbas on
a work by Mohammed bin Said bin Yehya bin Ahmed bin Dawud bin Abubaker
bin Ya-aza from Suz (probably Morocco). In a page from the manuscript, shown in
Fig.1 , the writing in red colour ink is a comment by the copier of the manuscript
and that in the black ink is the writing of the original author. We do not know much
about the Author except that he lived or comes from the area of Timbuktu since he
mentions Ahmed Baba, the most famous scholar from Timbuktu in the 1500s.
   The manuscript starts by explaining what astronomy is, and what its uses are.
Here is a direct translation of what Abul Abbas thinks Astronomy is:
   “. . . it is also called Science of Arithmetic. Because he who wants to know this science
   must look at the sky to observe the individual stars and to know their names. It is called
   Arithmetic, because he who wants to know it must learn Arithmetic.”
   Furthermore here are the uses of Astronomy:
      “It is useful for five things:
      - people’s guidance in and off sea. As God said: . . . so that you might
           guide yourselves by them in and off the sea.
      - Knowing estimation of the years, . . .
      - Decorating sky nearest to us. God said: we decorated the nearest sky
           with stars.
      - One of the uses of this science is knowing prayer times . . .
      - So that the angels can hurl them at the devil”

In other words, astronomy is used for guiding people on and off the sea, determining
calendars, decorating the sky and determining prayer times.
   This manuscript was a teaching manual for students in 1723, and yet these con-
cepts of astronomy (with the exception of the third and last items above) are exactly
as they are being taught in classes of basic general astronomy today.
   The manuscript also includes precise definitions of Islamic calendars, month,
leap years, etc. The author also gives algorithms on how to determine leap years
184                                                                                R. T. Medupe et al.

Fig. 1 A page from Abul
Abbas’s manuscript. The
red writing are comments
from a copier




in an Islamic calendar. These algorithms were converted into FORTRAN programs
and found to be correct.
   The final chapter deals with a description of a geocentric model of the heavens.
Here is a translation of their model:
   “He said that the orbits that God created in Heavens are nine. Seven of them bear planets.
   The eighth bears some other stars. The ninth is void of planets. The illustration of that is; the
   moon is in the orbit next to us. There is no other planet next to us if not the moon, except
   those stars that are said to be destined to hurl the Devil with. The next one is bigger it
   contains Mercury. He hinted here that orbit is bigger than the one below it and smaller than
   the planet above it. The third orbit bears Venus. The fourth bears the Sun. the fifth bears
   Mars. The sixth bears Jupiter. The seventh bears Saturn. The eighth bears other planets
   rather than these ones. The ninth is void of planets. This means that there is no planet there
   but the eight planets share it. Every one of them rotates round it once every day and night
   with the might of God. The orbit is where a planet makes a round voyage. God said every
   one of them swims in an orbit. We are in its center. The orbits are layered on each other like
   onion shells. The closest to us is what is in the earthen sky.”
   In Fig. 2 is a page from another manuscript showing diagrams of planetary orbits.
The above quote shows that Islamic astronomy borrowed a lot from ancient Greek
Ptolemaic astronomy. Although this is a long known fact, it has not been known
that Black Africans were learning these ideas at their schools over three hundred
years ago. This also shows that Islamic astronomers (at least in Timbuktu) were
The Timbuktu Astronomy Project                                                    185

Fig. 2 Diagrams
demonstrating orbits of
planets in the solar system
from another manuscript
from Timbuktu




not in contact with European astronomers as this manuscript was written over two
hundred years after Copernicus proposed a sun-centered model of the universe.




Direction to Mecca

Figure 3 shows an example of how stars were used to determine direction to Mecca.
It is a requirement of Islam that every mosque be orientated to Mecca. This direction
was determined in some cases by using stars to determine latitude and longitude for
both Mecca and the locality of interest. Then trigonometric identities were applied to
determine angles. This picture comes from a manuscript probably written in North
Africa (since the point from which direction is sought is Algiers). It was proba-
bly traded in Timbuktu. The author died in 1572. A redrawn sketch with English
translations is shown Fig. 4.
186                                                                     R. T. Medupe et al.

Fig. 3 A diagram from a
manuscript originally written
in Algiers in 1575, but
probably later traded in
Timbuktu. It shows the
direction to Mecca from
Algiers




Conclusions
The search for science content in the Timbuktu manuscripts marks an important
chapter in the discipline of history of science. It is hoped that the study of the history
of science in Africa will receive recognition it deserves as a result of this study. We
have shown that there is ample evidence to suggest that Africans were studying
mathematical astronomy in their schools in Timbuktu over four centuries ago, much
earlier than was expected. The project is multi-disciplinary and involves research
collaboration between two African countries with potential benefits for education in
Africa and African Diaspora.
   The contents of the manuscripts shown in this paper cover the subject of astron-
omy, mathematics and geography. We plan to produce a high school book showing
The Timbuktu Astronomy Project                                                              187



    North-
    east
    angle                                        Mecca                       South-east angle
                                                           Difference
                                                           between the 2
                                                           longitudes

  North                                                                        South

                                  Algiers        Differ
                                                 ence
                                                 B.
                                                 2
                                                 latitud
                                                 es




                                              West

Fig. 4 A translation of Fig. 3 into English


how mathematics was used to understand astronomy and geography in West Africa
over four centuries ago. We hope that in this way we can use Africa’s proud heritage
to attract African youth into careers in science and technology.
   More information about the project can be found at www.baghayogo.ast.uct.ac.za

Acknowledgments This research was made possible by a grant from the South African depart-
ment of Science and Technology (DST). We also wish to thank DST and ministry of Education in
Mali for facilitating access to the Ahmed Baba Centre in Timbuktu, Mali. We wish to thank the
Ahmed Baba Centre for their kindness in allowing us access to their manuscripts.



References
Adamek, T., Penkalski, K., Valentine, G., 2005, “The History of Trigonometry “ in
    www.math.rutgers.edu/∼∼mjraman/History of Trig.pdf.
Gingerich, O., 1986, Scientific American, vol. 254, p. 74.
Heath, Sir Thomas., 1981, “A History of Greek Mathematics”, vol. 2. New York: Dover Publica-
    tions Inc.
Hunwick, J., 1999, “Timbuktu and the Songhay Empire: Al-Sa’di’s Ta’rikh Al-Sudan down to 1613
    and other contemporary documents”, Brill Academic publishers, Leiden.
Hunwick, J., 2001, “Islamic Manuscript Heritage of Timbuktu”, in http://www.sum.uio.no/
    research/mali/timbuktu/links.html.
Hunwick, J.,& O’Fahey, S., 2002, “Accessing the Islamic Intellectual Tradition in Africa: The
    Arabic literature Project (ALA)” in proceedings of the Ink Road Symposium.
King, A. D., 1986, “Islamic Mathematical Astronomy”, London Varioum Reprints.
Prins, A. H. J., 1961, in the “Swahili-speaking peoples of Zanzibar and the east African coast”,
    London: International African Institute.
188                                                                          R. T. Medupe et al.

Saliba, G., 1991, “A Sixteenth-Century Drawing of an Astrolabe Made by Khafif Ghulam
    ‘Ali b. ‘Isa (c.850 A.D.),” Nuncius, Annali di Storia della Scienza, vol. 6, pp. 109–119.
Saliba, G., 1999, “Whose Science is Arabic Science in Renaissance Europe”, in http://
    www.columbia.edu/∼gas1/project/visions/case1.
Snedegar, K., 2000, “Astronomical Practises in Africa South of the Sahara”. In Selin H. and Sun X
    general editors. Astronomy Across Cultures: The History of Non-western Astronomy. Science
    across cultures, Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht; Boston, vol. 2, 455–473.
The Cosmological Vision of the Yoruba-Idààcha
of Benin Republic (West Africa): A Light
on Yoruba History and Culture

Aimé Dafon Sègla




Abstract The essay examines Idààcha cosmological vision as a kind of incorpo-
ration of Yoruba cosmology. It shows a process where the two strands, that is to
say, knowledge and belief can not be readily distinguished. The divinatory tradi-
tional calendar is indeed based on a scale of fixed number values whose defini-
tions are drawn from the concepts early traditional people have of the universe.
Thus, the signification of the terms that designate entities such as angle, circle,
center of the circle, midnight, time zone, the number of days in a week, etc., in
the Yoruba dialect Idààcha, mirrors cosmological standards. These words constitute
a landscape of memory shedding light on early Yoruba culture and history. Hence,
Idààcha being a significant western periphery of the Yoruba region, we examine
why its divinatory calendar would preserve an older spatio-temporal logic, beyond
Ifè and Oyo revisionism in Yoruba history. Finally, the article points out that the
translation of spatial and geometrical relations into temporal terms and vice-versa
may suggest a new indexical approach to the study of cosmology in relation to
the human body. As the body is in the mind, we say in relation to the human
mind.

Resume L’article examine la vision cosmologique du groupe dialectal Yoruba-
Idààcha comme un type d’incorporation de la cosmologie Yoruba dans la rationali-
sation de la vie sociale. Il met en exergue le lien à peine dissociable entre croyance
et connaissance. Le calendrier est en effet construit sur la base d’une échelle de
valeurs tirées de la vision cosmologique de l’univers. Ainsi, les significations, dans
le dialecte Yoruba-Idààcha, des termes qui désignent les entités comme l’angle, le
cercle, le centre du cercle, minuit, fuseau horaire, le nombre de jours de la semaine,
etc., renvoient systématiquement à l’échelle des valeurs standardisées inventées
par la cosmologie. Ces mots Idààcha qui  parlent  constituent un paysage de
mémoire qui renseigne sur les symbolismes originels dans l’histoire et la culture



Aimé Dafon Sègla
ORKESTRA Consulting, 16 Place de la Madeleine,
75008 Paris, Tel: 01 44 51 51 53/57, Portable: 06 19 31 87 42
E-mail: a s aime@yahoo.fr, asegla@orkestra.biz, aime.segla@ethnologie.uni-halle.de


J. Holbrook et al. (eds.), African Cultural Astronomy – Current Archaeoastronomy
and Ethnoastronomy Research in Africa.     C Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2008   189
190                                                                           A. D. Sègla

Yoruba. Partant, l’article examine soigneusement la question de savoir pourquoi le
calendrier divinatoire du pays Idààcha qui est un pôle significatif de la périphérie
occidentale du pays Yoruba préserve une logique spatio-temporelle très ancienne
par-delà Ifè et le revisionnisme oyo. Finalement, il conclut que la lecture simultanée
des représentations spatiales et géométriques, en même temps comme des données
temporelles, suggère une nouvelle approche de l’étude de la cosmologie en rapport
avec le corps humain. Puisque le corps est dans le cerveau, nous dirons, en rapport
avec l’esprit humain.

Keywords: /Mots-clés: Cosmology in metrology, belief and knowledge, Yoruba his-
tory, spatio-temporal thinking / Cosmologie en métrologie, croyance et connais-
sance, histoire yoruba, représentation spatio-temporelle/.


Introduction
This paper is in honor of and was presented shortly after the 2006 Total Solar Eclipse
in West Africa. In connection with that particular historical and celestial event, one
major theme is developed in this essay: the recovery of layers of historical mem-
ory in Idààcha practices and language forms to shed light, first, on Idààcha-Yoruba
cosmological vision and second, on early Yoruba culture and history – Idààcha is
a western dialect of Yoruba in the center of Benin Republic (Fig. 1). For this anal-
ysis, we use specific techniques of semantic reconstruction in Idààcha dialect of
Yoruba and spatio-temporal encoding based on the mathematical foundations of –
perhaps – an earlier form of Ifa divination. We examine different cases as kinds of
incorporation of Yoruba cosmology into real life. Using Idààcha as a case study,
we try, first, to show the intrinsic character of the human mind. We then give some
epistemological conclusions and lessons to engage young African people and we
suggest the importance of teaching African technology and particularly cultural as-
tronomy in African classrooms. Secondly, we show why, Idààcha being a significant
western periphery of the Yoruba region, its divinatory calendar would preserve an
older spatio-temporal logic, beyond Ifè and Oyo revisionism in Yoruba history.


The Intrinsic Character of the Human Mind from a Case Study
of Yoruba-Idààcha Cosmological Vision

Celestial observations and the associated beliefs and Deities are common to people
around the world. The cosmologies of the Batammaliba from northern Benin and
Togo, the Sotho, the Tswana, the Xhosa and the Zulu of south Africa, the Mursi of
Ethiopia (Holbrook 1998), and of course that of the Dogon of Mali and the Yoruba
of Nigeria, Benin and Togo, are not in anyway envious of that of Western people.
Light on Yoruba History and Culture              191




Fig. 1 Yoruba population area from Igue (1970)
192                                                                          A. D. Sègla

Let us take the example of the Yoruba. The 29th March 2006, day of total solar
eclipse in West Africa, the Idààcha people chanted their ritual telling the sun to let
the moon go. The traditional song says: “ojurun (oju orun) mu osupa, bi alele e jo e
[. . .]”, which means: “the eye of the sky (sun) has captured the moon, it will let her
go when comes the evening. . .”. The Idààcha eclipse song considers indeed the sun
like a magnet which captures the moon and lets it go after some time. This sounds
like the heliocentric conception model of the universe developed and defended by
Galileo. From a comparative standpoint, the difference is that traditional Idààcha
people’s knowledge is highly intuitive and oral, while the knowledge of Galileo is
theoretical and highly developed and written.
     Again, from the Yoruba Idààcha people, the reading of eight consecutive time
zones from midnight, iwon ri iwon ogun mejo which means “the adding of mea-
surement” (Measurement has seen measurement and so on eight times, the process
giving finally a total accumulation of eight measurements) is reminiscent of the
practice of the Italians who also used to count 24 hours consecutively and not twice
a dozen hours. The practice is also that of the moderns astronomers like Ptolemy
who counted “24 hours consecutively between two middays” (Arago 1854). If mid-
night which is said to be called in Idààcha iwon ri iwon (measurement has seen
measurement eight times) has been taken as the beginning and at the same time as
the finishing point of the whole day, in other words, a time which goes from the
unit time zone iwon (the base of the measurement) to eight units iwon ri iwon ogun
mejo – measurement added eight times (Fig. 2), the modern astronomer Copernicus,
the Egyptians, Hipparcus, the ancient Romans, the French, the English, the Spanish
did the same way in fixing also midnight as the beginning of the civil day (for more
details about iwon ri iwon, see Sègla et Boko 2006).
     Let us give again another example: in Europe, it is speculated that the obser-
vation of the seven visible celestial bodies – five visible planets and the sun and
moon – inspired the Gregorian week of seven days. But for all the Yoruba, the
original and founding myth says that the world had four corners at the time of
its creation. This is the bases of their week of four days. It is what the Yoruba
call orita – the crossing road. In Idààcha, the same idea is more mathematically
explicit (Sègla 2003). The conception is indeed unusual. According to the legend
recounted by an Idààcha man in Magoumi in Benin Republic, a Yoruba Idààcha
man, who wanted to avoid having his four sons each hide in a corner of the rect-
angular ogba (hut), preferred to build a hut that was circular agbo, a word associ-
ated with the expression ilé eniyan merin or in a shortened form amerin (Idààcha),




Fig. 2 Iwon ri iwon –
measurement has seen
measurement eight times
consecutively
Light on Yoruba History and Culture                                                 193

meaning house people four. In this way, the father ensures the unity and power of
his family. In fact, for the man from Magoumi, the four corners of a rectangle are
gathered together at the center of the circle. This is also the origin of the name
given to the center of a circle eerin which means four. In traditional Yoruba enu-
meration, the series one, two, three, four, five, six, etc. corresponds to the sequence
of cardinal numbers ookan, eeji, eeta, eerin.. . . The equivalent numeric adjectives
are mokan, meji, meta, merin. . ., which are noun-phrases containing a verb. The
verb that acts in them is mu, which means take or separate. Thus the sequence
is mu ookan (take one), mu eeji (take two), mu eeta (take three), mu eerin (take
four). . .etc. The imagining of the circle in the language system starts from the con-
ception of the rectangle with its four corners. Thus taking these corners away one
by one, the figure of the circle is like four corners dissolved in the center (Fig. 3)
or four corners taken to the center, amu eerin (Idààcha) meaning having taken away
four.
    It is this idea that is intuitively present in Yoruba cosmological belief. According
to that belief, the universe is round, and its creation starts with four corners, the
four points of the compass encoded in the language system as igun merin (angles
four). A belief that inspires the Yoruba traditional calendar with the four-day market
cycle and the Yoruba four-day week, each of the four days having been given the
name of the four most important deities in Yoruba history who created the universe,
Orunmila (the supreme God that is in the sky), Obatala (the first Yoruba aborigine
king between 2000 before common era and 500–700 common era), Oduduwa (the
king that founded the dynastic power in Ilé-Ifè between the Vth and the VIIIth cen-
tury CE) and Shango (the king that represent the founding and the power of Oyo).
Moreover, in the expression igun merin, angle four, igun is a noun in which, the
verb gun expresses the idea of meeting or bringing together and so, igun signifying
corner expresses the notion of making two walls meet making a right angle. Thus,
in Yoruba, igun is in principle a right angle, and indeed the traditional Yoruba house
is rectangular ogba, with four right angles. Here we see how the conception of the
circle is obtained starting with the center defining the totality, meaning the circle
and all his other elements in the “powerful” center. The traditional organizations of
a Yoruba village and the family group can serve as a social illustration. The chief
of the family group whose house is situated generally at the center of the family
compound, in a Yoruba town or village, is indeed baale agbo ilé chief circle houses;




Fig. 3 Orita (crossing road)
194                                                                            A. D. Sègla

the wives of the chief having their rectangular houses on a perimeter that forms the
circumference of a circle agbo ilé. This shows how the mnemo-technical device of
geometrical and spatial order is also a landscape of memory.
    But how came this to be? In fact, these different concepts and representations
of Yoruba people – the Idààcha in particular – have a cosmological origin. It is
that cosmological vision that gives Figures 2, 4 and 8 sacred status placing them in
the center of all Yoruba cognitive activities. A type of priest, Babalawo – owner of
secrets- in Idààcha country speaking old Idààcha – a dialect closed to the original
Yoruba language ‘’Ifè tutu, Icha tutu” – described the rituals sequences before a
divining process (Sègla et Boko 2006): the diviner, before divination, refers to the
air to announce an imagining body in circular movement. This is symbolized by
the divinatory chain that the diviner turns around a vertical axe. He then marks the
center of the imagining circle. The divining chain with 8 cowries, each of them
having a concave and a convex face, is then put down following the vertical axis in
the center of the circle. The diviner recovers the chain with the bag that was used
to contain the chain before. By this way, the diviner looks for heat, in another word
fire. Then, the diviner continues the ritual in putting a little water at the four corners
of the circle, in front, behind, at the right and the left of the divining chain set down
at the center. This manner, he called for water and by referring to the four cardinal
points, he signifies that the body in movement is earth. And finally, the chain being
always at the center, the diviner calls for the cosmos spirit to complete the process
of Eeji-Onilè which means the two that possess the world. The diviner says: “I have
now got the four necessary elements on earth. May God give me the four counterpart
corresponding elements which sit with Orunmila or Olodumaré in the sky.’’ At that
stage, the diviner can throw down the divining chain and identify a configuration for
interpretation (Fig. 4).
    The divinatory traditional calendar is so based on two forces – as is also the
divinatory Ifa system: first, there are the earth forces with four (4) signs (fire, earth
material, air and water) and second, there are cosmic environment forces also char-
acterized by symmetric correspondent signs of that of earth counterparts in the sky.
It is the elements of that couple Earth-Sky which interacts with each other and gives
indication to the diviner for predictions. The association of the two gives meaning
to the Yoruba expression Eeji-Onilè, the Two that own the Earth. In comparison,




Fig. 4 The divining chain
Light on Yoruba History and Culture                                                                   195

Swerdlow (1998) reported a similar practice among the Chaldean. Swerdlow who
reported Oppenheim (1974) wrote that
   The principles of divination from natural phenomena are set out in a text of the Neo-
   Assyrian period, [. . .] as “A Babylonian Diviner’s manual”, containing catalogues of two
   series of ominous signs on the earth and in the heavens, both astronomical and meteorologi-
   cal, that explains the relation of signs in the heavens and on the earth to each other [. . .] The
   signs in the sky just as those on the earth give us signals [. . .] their good and evil portents are
   in harmony (i.e., confirming each other). The Sky and earth both produce portends; though
   appearing separately, they are not separate (because) sky and earth are related. A sign that
   portends evil in the sky is (also) evil on earth, one that portends evil on earth is evil in the
   sky [. . .]. These are the things you have to consider when you study the two collections.
   (Swerdlow 1998: 3–4).

In the Yoruba case, the signs of the sky and that of the earth forming the Eeji Onilè
reflect and clarify the duality inherent in Yoruba system. Four signs on earth and
four signs in the sky interacting is the reason of the presence of eight cowries on the
divining chain. In fact, for all the Yoruba, Morton’Williams (1964) has reported that
   The House of the Sky is the domain of the supreme God, Olorun Olodumaré (Olorun means
   ‘Sky-Owner’) [. . .]. The Earth is the domain of the Godess Onilè, Earth-Owner, who is
   sometimes simply called Ile [. . .]. Life in the third cosmic realm, Ilé aiye, the house of the
   World, is good only when good relationships are maintained, with the gods and spirits of
   the other two [. . .]. (Morton-William 1964: 245–246) (Fig. 5).

This cosmological conception and vision of the Yoruba people – the Idààcha in
particular – is incorporated in real life: we already described before the day and the
night equally divided into four (four time zones) and the whole day divided into
eight parts. The week has four days, the month has seven weeks of four days. A
particular use of this principle in Yoruba-Idààcha country is the mortuary ceremony




Fig. 5 Eeji onilè(the two that own the earth): Cosmological model of the Yoruba, from Morton-
William (1964: 249)
196                                                                               A. D. Sègla

which takes place the day of the sixth market after the death of a dead person, oja
mefa (market six), in other words, six weeks of four days after the death (Fig. 6).
    More interesting, all the traditional ceremonies in Idààcha [the ikodun (annual
harvest ceremony to celebrate the sufferings of the year), the oja mefa (the mor-
tuary ceremony), the eru gbigba (the acquit-ment ceremony of the dead person)
or the ode gbigbe (the hunter ceremony to acquit the dead person who has been
a hunter in his life)] are regenerative rituals that recreate original time (titi lailai
ati lailai) (lost in the past and deeply lost in the past). This has been also an
observation by Horton (1970) in his work about Africa. Horton has given it the
qualification of “rites of recreation” or the “return to the beginning” (Horton 1970).
Even the most fundamental Yoruba deities and the secondary deities are derived
from the diagram of worldly creation Orita. In other words, they are all derived
from two and four. The most fundamental deities are 42 or 24 = 16, and the sec-
ondary deities are 32, 64, 128, 256 (25 , 26 , 27 et 28 ). The scale of sacred Yoruba
values, 1, 2, 4 and 8 (20 , 21 , 22 et 23 ) and 16, 32, 64, 128, 256 (24 , 25 , 26 , 27 ,
28 ) are the products of the divining chain giving a total of 256 divination chap-
ters which are all coded linguistically in Yoruba language. It is not only an in-
corporation of cosmological standards for the rationalization of life but the sys-
tem affects also the intellectual activity. Indeed, the Yoruba mental model built
from cosmovision is a generative scheme that has founded the twenty base oral
numeration system which was originally a five base system. The five base system
moved then further to twenty base by the incorporation of the cosmological mental
model (Sègla 2004b). It is the same principle that founded the binary and hexadec-
imal code bases in Ifa. Indeed, in Ifa, it is the divining chain as a medium and
form of inscription that gives a place value numeration system. Because the cowry
shells appear on two sides of the divining chain and are aligned, viewed from the
left to right and from bottom to the top, there is a resource for the hexadecimal
system to occur. The 256 Yoruba linguistic codes in Ifa are thus all hexadecimal
and at the same time they are convertible to binary codes (Sègla 2004a). In the
computer machine language, a structurally identical system represents all numbers
and all alphabetic characters that is also the base of high modern computing. Of
course, the US army developed and used the same principle to improve its com-
puter data system and organization in the sixties. It is the same principle which is
nowadays generalized and is at the basis of the Great Computer Data and Audio
revolution.




Fig. 6 Oja mefa (mortuary ceremony: market six), from Sègla et Boko (2006: 23)
Light on Yoruba History and Culture                                                   197

Idààcha Divinatory Calendar – a Spatio-temporal Logic
Beyond Ifè and Oyo Revisionnism: A New Light on Yoruba
History and Culture

Considering several data gathered from Idààcha, we affirm that this essay addresses
earlier pre-colonial constructions in a divination calendar rather than echoes of Eu-
ropean contact. We maintain that study of Idààcha divinatory calendar gives ev-
idence of a pre-Ifa divination system that remained immune from Ifa hegemony,
sharing claims of aboriginal status with a cluster of associated cults; or evidence of
archaic ritual language forms, echoing earlier spoken dialects that resurface in the
voices of possessed devotees in Idààcha land. But, does a simpler divinatory matrix
imply earlier history? Many parts of Yoruba land have nowadays divination with
(obi) (kola nuts) and cowries. Does this imply an earlier form? Indeed, if formal cor-
respondences between 2’s, 4’s and 8’s do not in and of themselves prove anything,
what is a proof is the straight path that Idààcha divinatory calendar draws towards
Yoruba past, reaching the aborigine original Obatala period in going through cosmo-
logical and spiritual sacred Ilé-Ifè. To maintain why Idààcha is a significant western
periphery of the Yoruba region and why its divinatory calendar would preserve an
older spatio-temporal logic, beyond Ifè and Oyo revisionism, we give two series of
arguments: First, we take into account the considerable debate concerning the sacred
status of Ilé-Ifè in relation to the Oduduwa migration or conquest, on the one hand,
and the rise of the Oyo Empire, on the other hand. Robin Horton (1979) covers
a lot of important ground and makes an “elder statesman” argument that we ad-
dress, engaging the positions of Akinjogbin (1980), Atanda (1996), Olomola (1976)
and Shaw (1980) on the fact that a pre-Oduduwa ancient and aborigine period ex-
ists in Yoruba history. Akinjogbin (1980), when reconstructing the oral tradition
of origins (Ikedu) confirms a later Oduduwa conquest of Ilé-Ifè. We also mention
Obayemi (1979), Apter (1987) who cautiously reviewed the historical problematic
of the Pre-Oduduwa Yoruba “base-line”, highly mythic and hypothetical, as is the
Ilé Ifè’s enduring sacred status well illustrating a cosmological and spiritual origin
of Ifè – Oduduwa coming from the sky, from the earth or from the ocean to cre-
ate Yoruba cradle in Ilé-Ifè. We also cite Samuel Johnson’s History of the Yorubas
[1948(1921)] in relation to the rise of the Oyo empire and to colonial discourses
of Yoruba nationhood and imputed migrations from Egypt or Mecca denying the
cosmological origin and therefore the sacred status and spiritual dimension of Ilé-
Ifè. Indeed, Oyo neglected, ignored and contested the ideological and cosmological
text that Ifa represents in Yoruba history and that Ifè was taking care of as well
(Apter 1987). In situating the political and historical contextualization of these three
great Yoruba periods (Sègla et Boko 2006), it appears that Oyo is a revisionist vi-
sion in Yoruba history while Ifè remains its spiritual and ideological virgin version
permanently in opposition to Oyo. Not surprisingly, Oyo empire and colonial Oyo
have been for long dominated by conquerors and looters who were, somehow, very
less interested in intellectual and cultural matters. [For more detailed analysis on
these three periods, see Sègla et Boko (2006) and Apter (1987)]
198                                                                                   A. D. Sègla

  Regarding the frontier line between the ancient period and the Oduduwa period,
we cite Obayemi (1979):
   The Oodua-Obatala legends, the Igbo-Ifè rivalries [. . .] answer unequivocally in favour of
   the “imposition of a new order from outside”, of Oodua landing from “orun” on Ora Hill
   and from there encroaching upon, overthrowing and being resisted by the bearers of the
   indigenous culture, the Igbo culture with its artistic fluorescence, under the leadership of
   Obatala. Dynastic Ilé-Ifè was the fusion, the compromise of the two. The Oodua-obatala
   legend, following the archaeological reconstruction would then be telling us of the pangs of
   integration of two systems – an “indigenous” one with its multi-settlement character, with
   the new socio-political monolithic dynastic culture, with its idea of a nucleated settlement
   (a city wall).

According to Obayemi (1979) and on the basis of archaeological findings around
Ilé-Ifè, the Igbo, from the actual Ile-cha and the Ifè who spoke the same language
(the ancient original language Ifè-tutu or Icha tutu) continued to live together after
the establishment by Oduduwa of the new dynastic political order V-VIIth century at
the latest (Horton 1979). However, dispersions, at the same period, from Ilé-Ifè and
Ilé-Icha to the East and to the West are plausible. To the West, we have in mind here
very ancient Yoruba kingdoms like Igede, Popo, Ketu, Chabe, Iloji and Ifita which
already existed from the X–XIth century at the latest (Dunglas 1957), (Igue and
Yai 1973), (Gayibor 1985), Eades (1980). To take it briefly, giving archaeological
data and glutto-chronological analysis results, Yoruba language differentiation as a
distinct group from that of the Kwa would take place near by 3000 BCE, some-
where in the actual region of Niger-Benoue-Congo (Horton 1979). More ever, some
independent groups developed an original proto-Yoruba language near by 500 BCE
(Horton 1979). These groups were probably those who spoke original language Ifè-
tutu or Icha-tutu. Horton (1979) thinks that dispersions of proto-Yoruba from there
to the south and to the west would have begun already 500 BCE. These dispersions
have continued reaching their highest point at 500 CE – at the time the actual Yoruba
population has been constituted and completed. It is these dispersions that have
been accelerated by the new dynastic political system introduced by the dynastic
king Oduduwa near viiith–ixth century (Obayemi 1979). One can then says that the
Yoruba kingdoms at the West of Ilé-Ifè like Igede, Popo, Ketu, Chabe, Iloji and Ifita
existed already from the ixth century at the latest. Ifita (Ifè ita) which means the Ifè
of abroad, the Ifè of the west has given rise later to the kingsdom of Idààcha from
the XV–XVIth century under the pressure of the Fon raids and invasions (Fig. 7).
    Second, we supplement the semantic reconstruction of Idààcha root-morphemes
in divinatory calendar with other linguistic data, that is, oriki (litanies, – erikin in
Idààcha)-, oral histories, hunter’s chants which tell of various migrations to see
how local Idààcha historical consciousness agrees with our claims. And interviews
with diviners illuminate the fact that the spatio-temporal metrics of the divinatory
paradigm Eeji onilè (the two that possess the universe) makes local sense. We
hear for instance from different Olorisha and Aworo and from the Ogboni elders
(adepts of secret cults, secret holders) in Idààcha, and their esoteric well confirms
claims about the earth – the Edan Ogboni captures the pairing of the owners of the
earth very nicely. They all are those who are original owners of the land before the
Light on Yoruba History and Culture                                                   199




Fig. 7 Main migration axis at the origin of the foundation of Idààcha


dynastic Ifè Egba Omojagun immigrants arrived from Ifè – In fact, the Omojagun
are those who rule the dynastic power nowadays in Idààcha country. We also see
the major Orisha cults in Idaacha, and what visions of the past they perpetuate, that
is Obatala orisha cult or localy called Baba n’la or Ocha. Here are below some of
selected linguistic data about such claims:
    Leading by a so called Oba Ayaba Oké (Adédiran 1984), the litany (oriki or erikin
in Idààcha dialect) of the first Ifita says they had simply emerged from the earth on
Ifita neighboring mountains. Parts of the Ogoja litanies – one of several Ifè ifita
lineages in nowadays Idààcha – is told and explained by Bara Boko1 (Boko 1997):

         “- Tete ase ti wa li eyinode
         - Ifita ti wa li itemu li ijemu
         - Ifita ti wa li ajiwo li ajite
         - Atilese a san li isuyi omo ase mu. . .
         - Omo eweka si a ni onia ku
         - Omo atilese li Oke Ejofa.”

Which means:

         - Before everything, there is the principle of creation out of time and
             space
         - The Ifita existed long time before at the worldy creation
         - The Ifita appeared on at the same moment with the earth and the sky. . .

1   By Bara Boko, 102 years old, Dassa-Zoumé, 16th august 1993.
200                                                                                  A. D. Sègla

       - Descendants of those who came out directly from the earth on Ejofa
          mountain. . .

The Ifè and the Icha in nowadays Idààcha country preserv the consciousness of their
oriental origin from Ilé-Ifè by giving the name of Odi Ifè to nowadays Idààcha area, Odi
Ifè meaning the opposit of Ifè, the Ifè of the west, the sunset Ifè. The litany of the Agenu,
one of the Ife pre-Oduduwa lineage still living at Ifita near by the city Igbo-Idààcha
tells it. It is racounted and explaned by Allagbe Ogugara Mathieu Ogija2

       “- [. . .]Omo Agenu kee je Ere [. . .]
       - Omo a bi ko je gbomsa [. . .]
       - Omo Agenu li Iwudu li Odi-Ifè”,

Which means:

       - [. . .] Descendants of those who dont eat the boa because it is their
            father
       - [. . .] Descendants of those who dont eat gbomsa fruits [. . .]
       - The Agenu are from the village of Iwudu in Odi-Ife.

Of course, the Ife and Icha lineages in Idààcha name the East as ese ocha, ese baba
n’la, that is to say, the leg of the deity Obatala or Baba n’la. As to the West, they
name it as ese buku, that is to say, the leg of the deity Nana-Buku. It is so surprising
to see that while the pre-Oduduwa people in Idààcha worship Baba n’nla (Ocha,
Obatala), the same are less interested in Oduduwa who is nearly non-existent. They
also ignore Shango and they adopt Nana Buku, the deity they appropriated after
their later contact with the Akan people of the West (Badjagou 1986). How to ex-
plain such jumping in their history from Obatala to Nana-Buku without Shango, the
terrific king and deity of Oyo if not their intimate, considerable and strong links
with the original aborigine Ife. The apparent solid attachment with aborigine pre-Ifè
is locally expressed by the following litany:

       “Ilé-Ifè, Ilé Owuro,
       Ilé-Ifè Oodaiye, nibiti ojumo ti mo wa,
       Ilé-Ifè ori aiye gbogbo”. . .

Which means:

       - Ilé-Ifè where the worldy creation took place and from where came the
            first light,
       - Ilé-Ifè, the country of past times, the house of the beginning (aurora),
       - Ilé-Ifè is the place of worldy creation of the whole universe.

2 By Allagbé Ogugara Mathieu Ogija, 69 years old, in the village Itangbé (Dassa-Zoumé), 26th
august 1993.
Light on Yoruba History and Culture                                                 201

Other litanies are chanted by worshipers and devotees of earliest traditional Yoruba
cults in Idààcha like sapata or sanponan, omo-olu, osumare, iji, baba-n’la and ogun.
That is the case of the descendants of the pre-Oduduwa who came from Ile-Icha
through Oyo and living nowadays in the areas of Kamate – that is the Isagule-, in
the areas of Oké n’la – that is the Ayangi of Oké n’la -, in the areas of Chachégun –
that is the Isasiogun (the Icha have avoided the war, have won the war) – and in the
areas of Ichopa with the Omo-Icha d’Ichopa. Morton-William (1964), in his studies
concerning Yoruba cults has given a particular attention to the languages very close
to original Yoruba languages Icha-tutu and Ifè-tutu. Indeed, Morton-William (1964)
believes that the secret Yoruba cult named Oro in Oyo is not under the contrôle of the
Oyo themselves but rather under the leadership of the very old Yoruba community
groups called the Jabata (Sapata). Morton-William (1964) could therefore write that
“Jabata is said to be a community of Sa (Sha) Yoruba origin, a western Yoruba
people now mainly in Dahomey” (Morton-William 1964: 256). The Omo-Icha in
the actual city of Ichopa (Soponta in nowadays Benin Republic) in Idààcha country
are of those people Morton-William is talking about. The litany of the Omo-icha
lineage in Ichopa todays still keeps in mind the memory of their coming from Oyo
under the leaderchip of the great hunter Oba oli Iso Erin, the chief hunter who drove
them out of Oyo where they had been before the main persons in charge of the secret
cult Egungun. Their litany chanted and explaned by Baso Ogunlaye Joseph tells the
story3 :

         “- Omo iba liiso, Omo oloke,
         - Omo Oba pasan li Eyo
         - Omode ekiri meji l’owo
         - Omo adara e ba onia gbe
         - Omode afunwe tee l’ori oke
         - Omo sebusebu ire omi ko dun sa
         -Osese omi ko dun pa.
         - Omo adara aa je onia aa f’abere ta eyin.”

Which means:

         - Descendants of Iba li iso or Baso, descendants of masters of highti-
            nesses,
         - Descendants of the chief Egungun of Oyo
         - Descendants of great hunter, they always have two pieces of dry meat
            in their mouth. . .
         - Descendants of those who own the deity Majufe and are always white
            dressed
         - Descendants of those who know that it is not easy to run in water,
            even slowly (in slow strides). . .


3   By Baso Ogunlaye Joseph, 72 years old, an Omo Isa, 4th september 1993.
202                                                                                      A. D. Sègla

The other layers of historical memory in Idààcha are the Ogboni elders. Within the
Ogboni or Oloro in Idààcha, we have the amule or the Oji (the possessors of the
earth), the ile (the earth people) of ilule, the Ikona or the Igangan, the Omo-iroko
and the Omo-ayan or the Mamahun. Members of secret associations and priests of
secret cults, they are omnipotent during king intronisation or king mortuary cere-
monies. The litany of the Oji or the Amule lineage in Idààcha can express that very
nicely:

       “- Omo Oji li Kere,
       - Omo isa Omo Ikee [. . . ]
       - Omo a mu ile fu se odun da,
       - Omo oloro ko ro li ile. . .”

Which means:

       - Descendants of the Oji in the village of Kere from Iloji,
       - Descendants of the Icha from the Ikee group [. . .]
       - Descendants of those who know how to use the sand to replace gun-
          powder,
       - Descendants of secrets priests who never tell their secret. . .

The Igangan or Ikona, the Isesin or Agenu are good hunters very close to spirits,
to nature and to ancestral lands. They have wild life and good habituation to wild
animals, some of which are their totems. Their housing and living conditions remain
nearly unaltered. They live in hamlets somehow. The litany of the Isesin is explicit
on that4 :

       “- Bi osan pan ka ma te li ilaju li Isesin Ilagbe
       bi o ko ri ejo e ri agema
       - Omo a mu ekun digbaro.
       - Omo a mu ekun laye se aja. . ..
       - Omo Asipa eru li Ijaoku li Ikunu.
       - Omo eru meji li ajiba.
       - Omo eru li Agalaju li Isesin.
       - Omo osan pan ko oja iku li Isesin.”

Which means:

       - It is forbiden to enter the Isesin houses at midday,
       - Anyone would try it will meet a misfortune, a snake or a chameleon
       - Descendants of those who have panthers as guards. . .


4Recounted by Karita Hélène, an Isesin, 65 years old, in the village Kèrè (Dassa-Zoumé), 18th and
26th august 1993. Explained by Obalé Lucien, Chief of the Isesin lineage.
Light on Yoruba History and Culture                                                              203

       - Descendants of those who use panthers in place of dogs
       - Descendants of Asipa, the terror of Ikunu in Ijaoku.
       - Descendants of the two terrors of the wilderness, the hunters Oba Etan
           and Soaketedogu.
       - Descendants of those who are able to cause death every time they
           want. . .

Like all the pre-Oduduwa people in Idààcha, the Igangan or the Ikona work outside
the political order but surrounding and controlling it at the same time. Part of the
Ikona or Igangan litany expresses it5 :

       “- [. . .] Omo efan dundun abe ira
       - Ikona ko kale kin olu
       - Ikona ko dagoo itannan ko wo odi Jagun [. . .]
       - Omo aa se awo li iwanriwan ogun mejo
       - Omo a je ohun oro maa bu f’aya.”

Which means:

       - [. . .] Descendants of the black buffalo under the Ira tree
       - The Ikona who worship the divinity Arigbo can not kneel down when
            greeting the king Jagun.
       - The Ikona enter the palace without submitting themselves to the pro-
            tocol [. . .]
       - Descendants of those who accomplish rituals and sacred ceremonies
            in midnight
       - Descendants of those who eat offering sacred meals which can never
            be sent to women at home. . .

In summary, we have described and illustrated what Apter (1987), in Yoruba his-
tory, has called the “euphemism of conquest” which consists of a tacit distributing
and sharing role between the dynastic groups and the autochthonous pre-dynastic
groups. About Yoruba “euphemism of conquest”, Apter (1987) citing Lloyd (1955)
wrote the following:
    “Yoruba ideas of legitimate authority require a king to rule by virtue of his royal genealogy
    and reputable judgment, not by the military power of his ancestors. For this reason, conquest
    is rarely mentioned in the founding myth of kingdoms. Instead, a common euphemism of
    conquest is that the original ruler of a town invited the conqueror to assume leadership while
    he devoted his whole attention to town rituals.” (Apter 1987: 8).

And also the role the Ogboni elders (Oloro) play in Idààcha is the one that was
assigned to the most ancient inhabitants of the lands in order to reward them from


5By Karita Hélène. Explained by Ajasin Josué. Chief of the Ikona (Igangan) lineage, 85 years old,
26th august 1993.
204                                                                           A. D. Sègla

losing the political power in Idààcha. Nowadays Idààcha, the power is in the hands
of the Jagun who are Oduduwa lineage descent. The tradition in Yoruba history is
maintained since the conquest at Ilé-Ifè by Oduduwa when the autochthonous Igbo
people set up a secret cult called Ogboni in order to pursue the worship of their
Orisa (deities). These rituals and traditions are still in practice in Idààcha country
in memory of the pre-Oduduwa Yoruba founding myth who is Obatala, Baba n’la
or Ocha. Obviously, the given above answers many questions about Idààcha and
confirms well the essay’s main assumption, that is, why Idààcha and its divinatory
calendar would preserve a spatio-temporal logic beyond Ifè and Oyo revisionism.
Let us look at these important questions, that is: why in the pantheon in Idààcha land,
there is principally the deity Obatala also called locally Baba n’la or Ocha?; why
the Oduduwa cult is less represented while Nana Buku, the deity they appropriated
from their early contact with the Ashanti of the West is more represented?; why in
Idààcha land is there the Ayira cult and not the Shango cult as in Oyo for the same
deity (deity of thunder)? – Shango was a major king of Oyo, was a terrific king and
has been associated with thunder; why the priests of the deity sanctuaries and the
Ogboni elders in Idààcha are the owners of the lands or the first arrived in Idààcha,
the Ifè and the Icha tribes? And why all the rituals, the cults and all the traditions
in Idààcha accord with the symbolism of the crossroads, the diagram of worldly
creation (orita)?


Epistemological Conclusions and Lessons
First of all, on the technical level, the Yoruba-Idààcha idea of reading spatial and
geometric relations as temporal and algebraic terms – and vice-versa may suggest a
new indexical approach to the study of Yoruba cosmology in relation to the human
body and mind. These facts reported from Yoruba-Idààcha case studies demonstrate
the intrinsic character of the human mind and they need to be known by African
people, especially the young people by introducing disciplines such as cosmology
and astronomy in school curricula in Africa south of the Sahara. The young students
and the young researchers must know that they can mine the stock of traditional
knowledge to augment the actual state of science and technology. For example, tak-
ing the Batammaliba of northern Benin and Togo or the Dogon of Mali examples,
cosmovisions are set down – incorporated – in local everyday life. Indeed, they give
inspiration to meticulous and ingenious traditional architecture and ways of local
building techniques – structures, aeration, urbanism, design, etc. It is in these exam-
ples that young researchers should draw references for new technological innovation
to improve housing accommodations for people in villages and in cities. Because,
nobody sleeps very well now in these so called modern cement houses – they are
in fact heating machines – inherited from the colonizers. In the same way, young
philosophers, mathematicians and linguists should consider that African languages
convey the same universal concepts though their particular contextualization – have
Light on Yoruba History and Culture                                                 205

the same ability of conceptualization of new phenomenon – so that, if integrated
in school curricula – the scientific cultural level of African people can be raised to
that of those in the West. Socio-economical success in Africa south of the Sahara
depends partly on how African rationalities will be restored and stabilized. In fact,
like other studies presented at the Solar Eclipse Conference 2006 in Cape Coast,
Ghana, and in light of this Idààcha case study, the cultural perspective on science
and technology, and its development in a traditional society depends on anthropo-
logical research. It illustrates a form of rationality serving as an empirical basis for
theoretical constructions and technological innovations resulting in the stability of
traditional foundations.
    On the historical level, study of Idààcha divinatory calendar gives evidence of
a pre-Ifa divination system that remained immune from the current Ifa hegemony,
sharing claims of aboriginal status with a cluster of associated cults; or evidence
of archaic ritual language forms, echoing earlier spoken dialects of Ifè-tutu and
Icha-tutu, that resurface in the voices of possessed devotees in nowadays Idààcha
land.
    Idààcha should be regarded as a laboratory for the study of the ancient original
Yoruba languages Ifè-tutu and Icha-tutu to shed light on original Yoruba histori-
cal memory and culture. Obayemi (1976) describes the situation of some Yoruba
peripheral regions like Kaba and Ikale in Nigeria, or Ifè in Togo as something
that reminds the social political organization that has existed at the time before
the establishment in Ilé-Ifè of the dynastic centralized political power. About that,
Horton (1979: 95) exclaimed: “It seems unlikely that the social organization and
culture of this diaspora remained homogenous for very long.” However, it seems to
be the case. The absence of chieftaincy Oba or Oli Ilu (chief, owner of the land)
in Ifè-Togo or in nowadays Icha land in Benin Republic would probably be due to
the fact that “euphemism of conquest” did not take place at these places. And this
would tell us why it is only the pre-Oduduwa lineage tribes who arrange common
social life without any dynastic established political traditional power as is the case
in Kétu, in Igbo-Idààcha or in Chabè. Anyways, the pre-Oduduwa relics or clusters
seem to represent important layers of historical memory and moreover semanti-
cal truthfulness in Yoruba history and culture. More seriously, exploring the three
great historical periods in Yoruba history, we ask which historical layer is the most
important in Yoruba history – it is the pre-Oduduwa cultural baseline that Icha-Tutu
or Ifè-tutu represents, or an Ifè-centric system that survived Oyo revision, or an
Oyo-based system that survived British and French colonialism? Our conclusion
is that, it is the Ifè centrism system that is primary, the pre-Oduduwa period that
is secondary and the Oyo empire and colonial Oyo that is at the bottom. Finally,
a case study concerning Idààcha that uses a technique to reconstruct some impor-
tant elements in Yoruba history may suggest not only a new indexical approach
to the study of Yoruba cosmology in relation to the human body but also may
suggest the interpretation of Yoruba cosmology as a collective generative mental
model.
206                                                                                     A. D. Sègla

References
Adédiran B. (1984) Idaisà: The Making of a Frontier Yoruba State. Cahier d’Études africaines
    XXIV (1), 93: 71–85.
Akinjogbin I. A. (1980) The Concept of Origin in Yoruba History: The Ifè Example. University of
    Ifè Seminar Paper.
Apter A. (1987) The Historiography of Yoruba Myth and Ritual. History in Africa 14: 1–25.
Arago F. (1854) Astroeomie populaire, Oeuvre posthume, Tome Premier, Paris, Gide & Baudry;
    Leipzig, T. O. Weigel.
Atanda A. J. (1996) The Yoruba People: Their Origin, Culture and Civilization. in O. Olatunji
    (ed.), The Yoruba History, Culture and Language, Odunjo Memorial Lectures. Ibadan, Ibadan
    University Press: 3–34.
Badjagou O. A. (1986) Le pouvoir idéologique de la divinité Naa Bukuu chez les Yoruba du
    Moyen-Bénin et du Moyen-Togo. Mémoire de maı̂trise. Cotonou, Université nationale du
    Bénin.
Boko A. E. (1997) Contribution Idaasa au développement de la culture yoruba du 17e au 19e siècle.
    Thèse de Doctorat. Abidjan, Université de Côte- d’Ivoire.
Dunglas E. (1957) Contribution à l’histoire du Moyen-Dahomey (Royaume d’Abomey, de Kétou
    et de Ouidah). Études dahoméennes t. 1. Dakar, IFAN.
Eades J. S. (1980) The Yoruba Today. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.
Gayibor N. L. (1985) L’aire culturelle Adja-Tado, des origines à la fin du XVIIIe siècle. Thèse de
    doctorat d’État. Paris, Université de Paris 1.
Holbrook J. (1998) African Astronomy”. in Archaeoastronomy and Ethnoastronomy News Archive
    N 28.
Horton R. (1970) African Traditional Thought and Western Science. In R. Wilson Bryan (ed.)
    Rationality: Key Concepts in Social Sciences. Oxford, Basil Blackwell: 131–171.
——(1979) Ancient Ifè: A Reassessment. Journal of the Historical Society of Nigeria 9 (4):
    69–149.
Igue J. O. (1970) Civilisation Agraire des populations yoruba au Moyen-Dahomey et Moyen-Togo.
    Thèse de IIIe cycle. Paris, Université de Paris Sorbonne.
Igue J. O., Yai O. (1973) The Yoruba-Speaking People of Dahomey and Togo. Yoruba 1: 1–29.
Horton, R. (1979) Ancient Ifè: A Reassessment. Journal of the Historical Society of Nigeria 9 (4):
    69–149.
Johnson S. (1948 [1921]) The History of the Yorubas from the Earliest Times to the Beginning of
    the British Protectorate. Lagos, CMS.
Lloyd P. C. (1955) Yoruba Myths. A Sociologist’s Interpretation, Odu, 2: 20–28.
Morton-William P. (1964) An Outline of the Cosmology and Cult Organization of the Oyo Yoruba.
    Africa 34: 243–261.
Obayemi A. (1976) The Yoruba-Speaking Peoples to 1600. In J. Ajayi, M. Crowder (eds.) History
    of West Africa Vol. I. London, Revised Edition: 1966–263.
Obayemi A.M. (1979) Ancient Ifè: Another Cultural-Historical Interpretation. Journal of the His-
    torical Society of Nigeria 9 (4): 151–185.
Olomola I. (1976) The Eastern Yoruba Country before Oduduwa: A Reassessment. In
    I. A. Akinjogbin, G. O. Ekemode (eds.) Yoruba Civilization. Ilé-Ifè: Ifè University Press:
    34–73.
Oppenheim A.L. (1974) A Babylonian Diviner’s Manual. Journal of Near Eastern Studies 33:
    197–220.
Sègla D. A. (2003) The Scientific Mind and Cultural Articulation in an Oral Society: language as
    a mirror. Social Science Information, SAGE Publications 42(3): 339–374.
Sègla D. A. (2004a) De la Cosmologie Yoruba à une Théorie du Nombre: Le corpus Ifa revisité
    comme un questionnement de la mathématique orale. Max-Planck Institute for History of Sci-
    ence, Berlin, Preprint n 256.
Light on Yoruba History and Culture                                                            207

Sègla D. A. (2004b) Instruments et objets de l’évolution du développement du concept de nombre
    en Yoruba: relecture pour une épistémologie historique. Max-Planck Institute for History of
    Science, Berlin, Preprint n 257.
Sègla D. A et Boko A. E. (2006) De la Cosmologie à la Rationalisation de la vie sociale: ces mots
    Idààcha qui parlent ou la mémoire d’un type de calendrier Yoruba ancien. Cahier d’Etudes
    Africaines 181, pp. 11–50.
Shaw T. (1980) Prehistory. in Obaro Ikime (ed.) Groundwork of Nigerian History. Ibadan, Heine-
    mann: chap. II.
Swerdlow N. M. (1998) Babylonian Theory of the Planets. Princeton, Princeton University Press.
The Relationship Between Human Destiny
and the Cosmic Forces – A Study
of the IGBO Worldview

Barth Chukwuezi




Abstract The Igbo Society in Nigeria has a complex relationship between their des-
tiny and the cosmic forces, which is reflected in their various ontological worldview
and cultural configuration. The moon, stars and other heavenly bodies have a lot of
import on the socio-cultural activities of the Igbo people. This paper seeks to examine
how these heavenly bodies influence and even direct various socio-cultural organi-
zations of the people. These are quite evident in the various life cycles and beyond
such as at birth, death and even life after. The paper is situated in the realm of cultural
astronomy, which will examine the various cosmological beliefs that affect the Igbo
cultural organization. This paper is quite necessary since some of the beliefs are being
lost and not articulated due to the impact of Christianity and modernization.



Introduction
The Igbo live in the southeastern part of Nigeria and are largely patrillineal descent
oriented with strong religious inclination that pervades social activities both in the
traditional and modern society. They are one of the many ethnic groups that make
up Nigeria. The cosmic forces being referred to here are the heavenly bodies – the
moon, the sun, the heavens (sky) and the stars, which have relevance to the social
structure and social organization of the Igbo people and consequently influencing
their worldview. Worldview here refers to the various beliefs and practices, which
inform Igbo belief systems, social structure and social organization including the
entire cosmogony and ontology of existence or being. Nwala (1985) has referred to
worldview as the basic belief which a people may have about the origin and nature
of the universe and life existence. It is a system of ideas, opinions and conceptions
of nature, society, humans and their place in the world. Throughout human history
and culture, people of all cultures have looked at the sky to improve their daily
lives, gather food, survive the environment and use the sky to find meaning in their


Barth Chukwuezi
Association of Professor, Department of Sociology/Anthropology, University of Nigeria, Nsukka


J. Holbrook et al. (eds.), African Cultural Astronomy – Current Archaeoastronomy
and Ethnoastronomy Research in Africa.     C Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2008   209
210                                                                        B. Chukwuezi

existence. For example, Holbrook in her study of the people of Kerkennah in Tunisia
has recorded that the fishermen still use the stars for navigation for their fishing
activities (Holbrook, 1998).
    Destiny in this discourse will refer to the various forces, heavenly forces, which
the Igbo people believe influences what happens to them. This is inextricably inter-
connected with their worldview which orders their existentialism.
    The study will attempt to situate the discussion in the traditional Igbo soci-
ety in order to understand the various facets of social structure and organizations
that have been influenced by these cosmic forces. The traditional Igbo society
is quite appropriate for this analysis because it captures the period when these
practices were discernable in the social structure before the influence of Chris-
tianity and modernization. Some of these traditional cultural practices anchored
within the Igbo worldview are still evident within contemporary Igbo social ac-
tivities and thought patterns. The traditional worldview in some respects still in-
fluence the modern worldview of the Igbo. The belief in spirit forces, which was
quite preponderant in the traditional society, is still relevant today. The people
still believe in spirit forces. There are ritualists both in the traditional religion and
Christian Pentecostal gatherings who claim to see beyond the natural eye, (Kalu,
2002: 350).




Fig. 1 Diagrammatic representation of the Igbo worldview
Relationship Between Human Destiny and the Cosmic Forces                             211

Igbo Cosmogony
The Igbo cosmogony or ontology is rooted in the belief that there are various beings
that inhabit the universe. The supernatural beings inhabit the realms above, the spirit
beings including the ancestors and other spiritual forces inhabit under the earth and
finally the human beings inhabit the earth. The heavenly abode is where the creator
Chineke, the Almighty lives and he is quite far from humans. The other heavenly
forces that are highly revered such as the sun, the sky, the stars and the moon also
inhabit the heavens. The Igbo believe in the dynamic interactions among these forces
and beings with corresponding powers and hierarchy. The supreme God and his
heavenly bodies have the highest power followed by the spiritual world of spirits
and ancestors and finally the humans who live on earth. It is left for humans to
manipulate and harness the spiritual forces on earth, above and under to fashion a
well-deserved society. The Igbo people have specialists such as medicine men, dibia
(native doctors) spiritualists, etc. who are quite versed in ways of harnessing these
spiritual forces for orderly existence. It is the aggregate of beings both in the natural
and spiritual reams, which order the world space and activities of the Igbo society.
The preponderance of religion in most of the Igbo people activities derives from
the people’s perception of their universe and worldview. The activities of humans,
social, economic, political, technological, etc. are the concern of humans as well as
the gods and the universe (Kalu, 2002).
    Van Gernnep (1960) argues that the universe is governed by a periodicity, which
has repercussions on human life with stages and transitions which involve different
types of movements and development. The celestial changes tend to depict changes
from month to month season to season and from year to year. This statement also
applies to the Igbo people. The universe is seen as the regulator of human events and
human cycles that are divided into various cultural activities denoting the passage
of time and events. The religious cosmological worldview tends to be validated
by the various life cycles of the Igbo right from birth to the grave. The various
rites of passage are sanctioned and were related to the cosmological worldview
which involve various ceremonies right from birth, naming of a child, initiation to
boyhood/girlhood, manhood/widowhood, marriage and finally death. The various
forms of relationship of the cosmic forces in the people’s social structure and social
organization will now be discussed in Igbo ontology.



The Heaven (Sky)
In Igbo the heaven or sky is called ‘Igwe’. The heaven is said to be the highest of
the abodes. In Igbo adage there is a saying ‘Igwe Ka ala’ – the heaven is higher than
the earth. In some parts of Igboland the sky or heaven has been transformed into a
god or cult deity called ‘Igwe Ka ala’. In Umunoha close to the town of Owerri there
is a deity called ‘Igwe Ka ala’ which commands lots of respect and patronage from
various Igbo groups. People come from far and near to consult the Igwe Ka ala deity.
212                                                                          B. Chukwuezi

The god is consulted for various purposes to mediate in the affairs of human beings.
Ilogu (1974) has noted that the sky (Igwe) is highly revered and venerated in many
parts of Igboland. In the current quest for title and status some Igbo people will assume
the title ‘Igwe’ meaning the highest, for a highly placed individual. The traditional and
even current Igbo society rulers in some parts of Igboland rightfully still bear the titled
name ‘Igwe’ of their various communities. This title and status marks the person as the
highest ruler of the community. Igwe symbolizes a high level of authority and status.
   The sky is the harbinger of rain. In conjunction with the earth the sky produces
food and plentiful harvest for human survival and as such the sky or heaven could
be seen as an enabling source of fertility. The Igbo believe that the sky brings rain
through the movement of the clouds. The clouds at various points in their movement
release the rain. As a result of the manipulative force of the humans, people could
engage ritual specialists who specialize in sending down the rain when required
and these ritual specialists are called rain makers. Rainmakers use the manipulative
ability of their ritual power to bring down rain when needed. The position of Rain-
makers is commonly recognized in Igboland and they occupy a special position in
the Igbo social structure.


Red Cloud (Urukpu)

Nwala (1985: 30–31) has pointed out that certain events on earth are symbolized
in the sky. The movements of clouds in the sky have various social significance
and are tied to various forms of activities. The red colour of the sky or clouds has
significance in the Igbo people’s social activity. Among the Igbo people of Owerri
the appearance of a red sunset is interpreted as a sign of death. When the read clouds
appear, they interpret that someone has been killed and their blood is reflected in the
sky. Nwala remembers as a child how his people of Mbaise, close to Owerri, felt
great sorrow and anguish upon sighting a red cloud in the evening sky. They felt
that the colonial masters had killed someone at Owerri. Owerri was the colonial
administrative headquarter for the Owerri district. It has a magistrate court that sen-
tenced people to death depending on their crime.
   Sky watching and its concomitant experience in social life can be seen with ob-
servations and interpretations of the phases of the rainbow. When there is a cloudy
sky with dark cloud gathering close to the earth and other signs of threatening rain,
people associate it with coming rain. But if a rainbow suddenly appears during this
time there is a general belief that it will not rain again. People fell free to go about
their normal business believing that it will not rain. When there is not much cloud in
the sky and the rainbow suddenly appears people are gripped with fear and appre-
hension. There is the general feeling that someone, an important person, is about to
die since the rainbow appeared suddenly. There is another symbolic interpretation
that the sudden appearance of the rainbow is an evil omen that is going to cause
great sorrow to the community.
   In Igbo mythology and ontology it is assumed that the sky is the husband to
mother earth and people hold this concept in their various forms of relationships.
Relationship Between Human Destiny and the Cosmic Forces                          213

They see the earth as a female goddess and the heaven a high male god. The high god
heaven sends its semen, the rain, to water and fertilize the earth for food production
and bounty harvest. It is generally believed that when the heavenly powers are angry
they seize the rain resulting in famine and drought and there is a special ritual to
cleanse and appease the earth and heaven for rain to come down again.
    It is also necessary to remember that the sky could be angry due to pollution
of the earth by evil acts and behaviour, which may offend the earth, and as such
the heaven may withdraw its bounteous harvest through withholding the rain. There
is therefore the dual intricate relationship between the earth and the sky in Igbo
worldview.
    The sky is also seen as a defender of justice and the punisher of the wicked
through the sending of lightning and thunder. In Igboland there is a deity or cult
called Amadioha (Kamalu in some areas of Igboland) representing the thunder.
Through the power of the sky it can send thunder, Amadioha. To any known evil
person in the community to kill that person. The god of thunder sends thunder to
unearth any devilish charm planted or buried against an innocent fellow. At times
people go to look for such evil medicine at the onslaught of thunder. The Amadioha
deity is propitiated through the Amadioha priest who works on his behalf. It is a
dreaded cult in Igboland and at times people curse their sworn enemies to be de-
stroyed by Amadioha. In traditional Igbo society the Amadioha cult is located at
various Igbo communities where the god is worshipped by its devotees but also to
assuage the anger of Amadioha.



The Moon (Onwa)
The moon plays a very important role in Igbo cosmology. The moon is not wor-
shiped neither has it a cult or is it regarded as a deity. Yet it has much influence
in Igbo society. The moon is always an interesting object to gaze at unlike the sun
that is seen as harsh and too powerful to toy with. The moon is looked at as being
benign and loving. Igbo people have the feeling that the moon lightens the darkness
of the night. Various moonlight plays are staged among the Igbo communities to
while away the night and prepare for the next day.
    The moon influences various activities of the Igbo people. The various phases of
the moon have different significance. There is the beginning, the quarter, the half
and full moon. At full moon, people with mental problem get worse and at that
period, people whose level of madness was regarded to be low could be seen acting
violently. The moon also influences the Igbo calendar. In fact the Igbo calendar
month is named after the moon, Onwa. The Igbo have 12 calendar months and each
of the various months have activities ascribed to them. The third month is the period
for planting though if the rain comes early planting could start in the second month.
The fifth month marks the first harvest of New Year. Though in some areas this
varies. The seventh and eighth months are usually marked by cultural festivities
which may reflect particular festivals like dancing, masquerading, etc. The Igbo
214                                                                        B. Chukwuezi

month has 28 days and the Igbo week (Izu) has four days. In present day Igboland
people have continued to assume socially titled names like ‘Onwa na etiri oha’ –
the person that shines his or her light on people like the moon does.


The Stars (Kpakpandu or kpakpando)

The stars are known among the Igbo though there is not much information about
the relationship of social activities with the stars. The stars are puzzled over at night
and people admire the constellations that beautify the sky at night. People admire a
night full of stars with shinning moon. Again when the sky is full of stars they know
there would be no rain. But when the stars disappear and the sky becomes cloudy
and threatening they associate it with rain and begin to prepare for that.
   Shooting stars have social significance for the Igbo. The Igbo believe that when
a shooting star appears in the sky, it means some important person is dead or about
to die. Among some Igbo people, however, shooting stars are associated with good
omens, that is, something good is about to happen.



The Sun (Anyanwu)
The sun is highly relevant in Igbo society and it influences the concept of the Igbo
worldview which is reflected in their various social organizations. The sun is seen
as the harbinger of day and night. It regulates when to work and when to rest and
sleep. In parts of Igboland it is symbolized as a deity or cult, or even referred to
as ‘sungod’. The cult is used to propitiate the sun for its influence in the affairs of
human beings. The Igbo have an ambivalent relationship with the sun. The sun is
feared and regarded as harsh yet the sun is the giver of life and strength to humans.
The sun is equally revered and respected. It symbolizes strength and masculinity. In
parts of Igboland like in the town of Nsukka, the sungod cult is symbolized with an
earthen pot and a ritual tree planted beside the earthen pot in front of the entrance to
the family compound. It protects the family members. The Igbo name their children
after the sun and at times they refer to some of their children as the sons of Anyanmu
(Ilogu, 1974).



Conclusion
The paper has tried to examine the various socio-cultural practices associated with
the cosmic forces among the Igbo, which influence their worldview. It has been
posited under the rubric of Cultural Astronomy, which has to do with the cultural
practices relating to heavenly bodies such as the sky, moon, stars etc. This ex-
ploratory work of Igbo cultural astronomy reveals a rich relationship with the sky. It
is hoped that more studies would be carried out to consolidate this field of Cultural
Relationship Between Human Destiny and the Cosmic Forces                                       215

Astronomy in Igbo anthropology discourse and studies. Soyinka (1976) has posited
that in much of the traditional societies including the Igbo, most of the activities de-
pended on the natural phenomena within observable processes of continuity, waxing
and waning of the moon, rain and drought, planting and harvest. There is much to
be explored in cultural astronomy to understand the various intricate relationships
between humans and the universe.


References
Campion, N., Curry, P. and York, M. (2004) Astrology and the Academy, Cinnabar Books, Bristol.
Chukwuezi, B. (1985) ‘Ikenga Cultural Objects and Some Manifestation of the Belief among the
    Uzo-Uwani Igbo in Ikoro’. Journal of African Studies, VI. 20–25.
Gennep, A. V. (1960) The Rites of Passage, University of Chicago Press, [Chicago].
Holbrook, J. C. (1998) ‘Stellar Navigation of the Fishermen of the Kerkennah Islands’. Archaeoas-
    tronomy & Ethnoastronomy Newsletter, Summer 1998.
Horton, W. R. G. (1956) ‘God, Man, and the Land in a Northern Igbo Village-Group’. Africa, 26,
    17–28.
Ilogu, E. (1974) Christianity and Igbo Culture: A Study of the Interaction of Christianity and Igbo
    Culture, NOK Publishers, New York.
Kalu, O. (1978) ‘Precarious Vision: The African Perception of This World’ African Cultural De-
    velopment, Fourth Dimension Publishers, Enugu, Nigeria, pp. xi, 282 p.
Mbiti, J. S. (1969) African Religions & Philosophy, Praeger, New York.
Metuh, E. I. (1981) God and Man in African Religion: A Case Study of the Igbo of Nigeria,
    G. Chapman, London.
Nwala, T. U. (1985) Igbo Philosophy, Lantern Books, Ikeja, Lagos.
Onwuejeogwu, M. A., University of Ibadan. Institute of African Studies, and ‘Odinani Museum
    Nri. (1980) An Outline of an Igbo Civilization: Nri Kingdom and Hegemony, A.D. 994 to
    Present, Published by Tabansi Press Ltd. For the Odinani Museum Nri, [Ibadan, Nigeria].
Ottenberg, S. (1958) ‘Ibo Oracles and Intergroup Relations’, Southwest Journal of Anthropology,
    14, 295–317.
Cultural Astronomy in the Lore
and Literature of Africa

Damian. U. Opata




                                  The Sun is my God
                                  And I shall worship Him
                                  And His Wife the Moon
                                  Who guards over us and puts us to sleep so we can be
                                  Alive the following morning.
                                                                                taban lo liyong.



Introduction
As Von Del Chamberlain and M. Jane Young (1996:XIII) have observed “Differ-
ent people have visualized the sky in many wonderful ways through art, crafts,
architecture, belief, religion, story-telling, lore literature and mythology.” This pa-
per examines the several ways in which African people have through belief, lore,
literature and mythology, attempted to examine the sky—a profound phenomenon
that the human imagination cannot but ponder on from time to time. Its positioning
is so spatially strategic that only blindness can prevent one from encountering it.
Its overall strategic positioning must have led the Igbo to coin the proverb: “If the
eyes do not look at the Sky, what else would they look at?” Yet, all that eyes have
been able to see while looking at the Sky are the clouds, the Sun, the Moon, and
the stars. Despite the fact that these things are seen on daily basis all over Africa,
the Sun, the Moon, and the stars continue to remain a mystery. Not only that, they
continue to constitute objects of wonder, puzzlement, and admiration although the
fact of their cyclic appearance and disappearance has compelled human beings to
rely on them for ordering events in their life. This compulsion to order events of
life according to human perception of these sky entities is best captured in the Igbo
proverb to the effect that, “when the sky suffers from cholera, people begin to move
their property about.” This proverb refers to a situation in which people rush to
secure their property whenever there is a heavy downpour. In this paper, therefore,
I want to examine the ways in which different African peoples have reflected on
the sky entities. Consequently, this paper is organized into two broad categories: the
ontology and functions of these sky entities.

D. U. Opata
Department of English and Literary Studies, University of Nigeria, Nsukka, Nigeria
E-mail: optdamian@fastmail.fm


J. Holbrook et al. (eds.), African Cultural Astronomy – Current Archaeoastronomy
and Ethnoastronomy Research in Africa.     C Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2008     217
218                                                                         D. U. Opata

Ontology of the Sun, Moon and Stars
In traditional Africa, hardly any attempts have been made to describe the shape and
structure of these sky entities beyond what normal human eyes can see. Nothing is
said about their size beyond what is seen and people never talk about their weights
or mass. The stars are described as tiny objects. People rarely gaze at the Sun, but
those who do know that at first visual encounter, the Sun is white and dazzling,
but a sustained 30-seconds gaze would reveal a charming and alluring velvet, bluish
colour, sometimes a resplendent dark green colour. One requirement among the Igbo
who want to “open their eyes” itu anya, is that they must look straight to the Sun
when it is bright, usually between 1 and 3 in the afternoon [Editor’s note: This is not
recommended and can cause permanent eye damage]. The conceptual equivalent of
“itu anya” is the mystical notion of the “third eye” which enables people to behold
what cannot been seen by the aid of normal human eyes. On such occasions, Sun
gazing appears to be the most profound aesthetic and humbling experience a person
could have.
    In traditional and indigenous African world views, things that exist are either
male or female, or sometimes, but rarely, neither male nor female. Many African
languages are not genderised. The consequence is that an impersonal pronoun is
used to refer to persons and entities, thus making it difficult to know the gender
of many phenomena. Generally, however, traditional knowledge experts, especially
diviners and medicine men and women can identify the gender of almost every-
thing, from plants to stones and spirits. In addition, some African mythologies
identify the gender of the sky entities especially that of clouds, Moon, and Sun.
Taban lo liyong’s poem from which the opening quotation to this study is taken
is titled: “The Sun is my God and I Shall Worship Him When He Rises, Reaches
His Zenith, and Reposes for the Night”. In this poem by a famous East African
poet, the Sun is regarded as male while the Moon, being the wife of the Sun, is
female. Although Parrinder (1967:67) argues that, “There is not much mythology
of the Sun and Moon, for in tropical Africa the Sun is always present and there
is no need to call it back in winter”, he goes on to give examples of countries
and communities where the gender of the Sun and Moon is known. Among such
people are the “Kraki people of Togo” where the Sun is said to be the husband of
the Moon; the Dagomba of the same Togo, and some unspecified people in Angola.
Among the Luiya/Abaluiyia of Kenya, both the Sun and Moon are regarded as males
(Wagner, 1954:28).
    The average African is not concerned about the gender of the Sun and the Moon.
Traditional healers and medicine men and women are interested in the gender of
the Sun and Moon because the cooperation of male and female forces is solicited
for the efficacy of some medicinal preparations. As Umeh (1999:43) has noted,
“certain entities or Ogwu are made when the Moon is waning, some when it is
waxing and some when the Moon has gone in (i.e., Moonless night periods – New
Moon). Feminists, especially radical ones are also concerned about the gender of
the Sun and Moon. Particularly of interest to feminists is the question of whether
it is the Sun or Moon that was first created. Although this has not yet featured in
Cultural Astronomy in the Lore and Literature of Africa                              219

the discussion of goddess religions, the debate will logically extend to this issue.
Eric Ten Raa (1965–6) recorded this myth about the Sun and the Moon among the
Sandawe people of Tanzania.

       Very long ago the Sun, who was the son of Mathunda,
       Lived in the north [the country of] Omi.
       In those olden days the earth was very beautiful and cool,
       And the ruler of the earth was the Moon.
       When the son of Mathunda looked up and saw the Moon,
       He loved her very much, and he followed her to the south,
       There where she lived in the sky. And he said: “Her I shall marry”.

If “the ruler of the earth was the Moon”, then there may be some significant cre-
dence to the claim by feminists that the world was perhaps matriarchal before the
new dominant and oppressive matriarchy. Among the Igbo, Southeastern of Nige-
ria, Umeh (1999:39) observes as follows: “It is to be noted that cancer the crab is
identified as Akwu Okala by Igba Afa which may also refer to the ancient sacred obi
building . . . One can look at the position as analogous to the God of Light, Anwu or
Akwu Okala or Atu, Whose Eye the Sun is, coming out of His obi [a house where the
father in a family stays] to announce the passing away of the old year and proclaim
the commencement of the new year. The Sun is in cancer annually from June 21 to
July 22. Its ruler is the Moon”.
    An interesting point in this Sandawe myth is the fact that the Sun “looked up
and saw the Moon”, suggesting as it does that the Sun and Moon (male and female)
originated differently, one in the North and the other in the South. This gives some
credence to a certain Igbo myth which has it that after God first created plants and
non-living things; he then created birds and animals and asked them to take care
of the other things. Both birds and animals failed to obey this command of God,
failing which God then created man. Man went about performing his duty peacefully
until one day that he chanced upon the daughter of Earth, fell in love with her, and
ravished her. Upon this God got angry and decreed that man’s punishment for this act
of transgression shall be death, and that when man dies, he shall be buried in the ground
to appease the Earth. This too suggests that woman was there before man was created,
and that they have different sources of origin. The implications are grave, pointing to
the fact that neither science nor myth nor religion has solved the mystery of creation
or evolution of the world, notwithstanding whatever scientists say. For Africans, there
was no problem deifying the Sun and the Moon, given their big size and brightness.



Deification of the Sun and the Moon
It is already common knowledge that Sun worship was rampant in tradition African
societies; the most widely noted being the worship of Ra – the Egyptian Sun god.
Many homes in contemporary Igbo society today still have the Onu Anyanwu – the
220                                                                       D. U. Opata

shrine dedicated to the Sun. Such a shrine is usually located very close to the en-
trance to a compound; which is to say that it is always located in front of a com-
pound, no matter the direction. Because of the abundant evidence of Sun worship
in Africa in particular and the world generally, I will not belabour the reader with
more examples. Rather I shall analyze the poem by taban lo liyong earlier alluded
to and the “Hymn to the Sun” in Chinua Achebe’s Anthills of the Savannah to see
the creative enunciation of reasons for the deification of the Sun.
   The poem “The Sun is My God and I Shall Worship Him When He Rises,
Reaches His Zenith and Reposes for the Night”, by its mere title, displays the pro-
tagonist’s unswerving determination to worship the Sun. This insistence is achieved
through the elaboration of the times that the Sun must be worshipped. The reasons
for this irresistible willingness to continue to worship the Sun at all times are nu-
merous. The Sun is seen as a protector of life because he “guards us”; he is also
an energizer since he “puts us to sleep so we can be active the following morn-
ing”. Moreover, the Sun is seen as an overlord who “rules over the firmaments”
and “There is none stronger than he”. From an implied comparatist position, the
protagonist further attests to the fairness of the Sun to all and Sundry. The entire
relevant stanza is worth quoting:

      The Sun is my God
      For he is fair to all.
      Unlike other men’s Gods
      He favors none and victimizes none.

The obvious reference here is to the Christian God who has a “chosen people”, the
Israelites. The same comparison is carried on further when the protagonist asserts:

      He has no wrath to punish to the last generation
      anybody
      For He is benevolent.

In other words, the Sun is not as vengeful as the Old Testament God. Indeed, the
entire poem may be read intertextually as an extended comparison with the Christian
God in which the Sun easily comes out as the superior moral being. Take another
stanza:

      The Sun is my God
      For He teaches by example
      Frightens us not with heaven and hell
      Life under Him is all He gives us
      And we grow like Him early in the morning, reach the
      heights of our power in midday, and gradually
      decline in a thoroughly expected way.
Cultural Astronomy in the Lore and Literature of Africa                             221

This stanza illustrates the natural temporal order of succession of events, pointing
as it were to the pattern that human life ought to take in the world. It also depicts a
certain stable order of the world in which the Sun is used as a model. The final point
is underscored when the protagonist affirms again,

       The Sun is my God
       And see how much He lives us free, unlike other gods
       Who make you work through trauma for disputable ends.

From all indications, taban lo liyong not only uses this poem to justify the worship
of the Sun but also to graphically depict the comparative advantage to be gained
from Sun worship as opposed to the worship of other Gods. And even though the
use of the expression “unlike other gods” is recurrent through out the poem, the
allusions to “heaven and hell” “He favours none, and victimizes none”, and “Unlike
other gods who make you work through traumas” suggest that the specific reference
is to Christianity.
    The image of the Sun in Chinua Achebe’s Anthills of the Savannah, the context of
the composition of a Hymn to the Sun by Ikem Oshodi, one of the major Characters
in the novel, is itself a cynical one. One, the Dictator in the novel is referred to as
“The wild Sun of April” (28). Ikem, a journalist is invited by his friend Chris Oriko,
to cover “a good will delegation from Abazon” (26). He is late for several hours
on the road due to a severe traffic jam. Interestingly, in the usual manoeuvre for
space by motorists during such traffic jams, Ikem beat a taxi driver to the game. In
a cynical note, the narrator notes that, “In all known such encounters [taxi drivers
attempting to overtake private car owners] between taxi and private drivers, the taxi
driver always won, is decisive weapon, the certainty that the owner-driver- will soon
concede his place than risk a dent on his smooth, precious carapace”. It is this victory
that Ikem decides to celebrate by composing a hymn to the Sun. In the Hymn the Sun
is severally conceptualized as “great carrier of sacrifice to the Almighty: Single Eye
of God”, “Undying Eye of God”, “One – Wall-Neighbour to blindness”, “Wide-eyed
insomaniac”, and “Great Messenger of the Creator” (30). These appellations stand
in sharp contrast to the role of the Sun in the unfolding crisis and dictatorship in
Kagan, the fictional country in which the novel is set. Indeed, it would appear that
the Sun is being chided for not doing what He should be doing, and for apparently
appearing to have taken sides with the dictatorship. Thus in several instances in the
Hymn, the Sun is almost being reprimanded for abandoning the people. Thus, we
have the following examples: “What hideous abomination forbidden and forbidden
and forbidden again seven times have we committed or else condoned, what error
that no reparation can help to erase?” (30). This is a direct address and challenge to
the Sun, a challenge arising from a trauma in the life of the people, leading them to
doubting the enormity of their whatever unforgivable crime. Then next, there is an
appeal to Him: “relent then for your own sake; for that bulging eyes of madness that
may be blinded by soaring motes of an incinerated world” (32). There is also a direct
accusation levelled against the Sun for seemingly taking sides with the dictator:
“What has man become to you, Eye of God, that you should hurt yourself on his
222                                                                                    D. U. Opata

account? Has he grown to such god-like stature in your sight? Homeward bound
from your great hunt, the carcass of an elephant on your great head, do you now
dally on the way to pick up a grasshopper between your toes?” (30). It is not just that
the Sun is accused of seemingly taking sides with the dictator, there is a suggestive
accusation of irresponsibility on his part.
   All in all, the Hymn to the Sun reveals that the Sun has great powers. It reveals
that He is the messenger of God, but a messenger of God accorded a deistic status.
The worry expressed in the poem is that with such powers, the Sun looks on uncon-
cerned when the people are traumatized by dictatorial leadership. But the narrator
does not stop at this experience of the powers of the Sun in the Hymn. It is not only
the people that have been subdued by the Sun; the elements of nature are equally
victims. The passage containing this insight is very telling in the power of the poetic
language in which it is conveyed, thus:

   In the end even the clouds were subdued though they had held out longest. Their bedraggled
   bands rushed their last pathetic resources from place to place in a brave but confused effort
   to halt the monumental formations of the Sun’s incendiary hosts. For this approach the
   Sun wreaked a terrible vengeance on them cremating their remains to their last flumes and
   scattering the ashes to the four winds. Except that the winds had themselves fled long ago.
   So the clouds’ desecrated motes hung suspended in a mist across the white face of the sky
   and gave the Sun’s light glancing off their back the merciless tint of bronze (32).

Given this severe treatment by the Sun, the people are totally bewildered, but they
can take solace in the fact that “it had happened before” (32) in a legend. But even
in the legend, the people were not so confused that they did not know what action to
take. But the present predicament of the people is loss of focus, even to take a drastic
step. So the narrator justifies this: “Because today no one can rise and march south
by starlight abandoning crippled children in the wild, savannah and arrive stealthily
at a tiny village and face upon its inhabitants and slay them and take their land and
say: I did it because death stared through my eye” (33).
    The upshot of all this is: why the evocation of the Sun in this manner? I imagine
that the sole thrust of these poetic evocation of the Sun is to illustrate the death
of the revolutionary, spirit among the people. But it is also to depict the inertia
responsible for this loss of the revolutionary spirit. In any case, it can also depict
a certain ambivalence characteristic of deities in Igboland. Otherwise, it would not
be suggested that the Sun would not relent an account of the people’s plea, but
for its own sake. There would also not be the suggestion that the Sun was becoming
irresponsible. But if it represents the death or lost of the revolutionary spirit, it shows
how in the cycle of things event have dramatically changed – for the better.
    While Achebe and liyong may have been dealing with a creative exploration of
the possibilities of the Sun as god or deity, Mazisi Kunene’s “collection of poems
translated from Zulu to English” (Xi) reveals the Sun as a benefactor, a guide, a
muse, and a protector. In a collection of poems translated from Zulu, and titled The
Ancestors and the Sacred Mountain (1982) Kunene presents to us various images of
the Sun. In the “Song of the Sun” (60), the Sun is presented as a benefactor, a deity,
an inspirer, and teacher. These are illustrated in the following lines:
Cultural Astronomy in the Lore and Literature of Africa                            223

       It was the Sun that invited us
       It made us sing the deep songs of the earth
       From his voice we learnt their secret and them.
       He said: ‘Bring the song’
       And I saw him bend down on the horizon
       To hug all the children of the earth.
       He uttered these words of command:
       ‘spread your hands for my gifts’
       And I raised them to his alter.
       On my right hand I saw a giant mushroom
       And on my left were two faces of the sacred ram.
       He said: ‘this shall lead into the memory of endlessness
       To link the past with the present,
       To ensure the continuity of life,
       To bequeath the child with the titles of the Sun
       These promises I shall keep.

The Sun is personified in its act of bending “down on the horizon/To hug all the
children of the earth”, but at the same time deified when the protagonist raises his
hands “to his altar”. The Sun is also depicted as the guardian of memory from when
we can learn the “secret anthems” of the earth. More importantly, through the Sun’s
benevolence, we can aspire to its status since it is his “promise to bequeath the child
with the titles of the Sun”.
   In “To a Navaho Boy Playing a Flute” (58), the poet protagonist depicts the glory
and grandeur of the Sun when he describes the image of the Navaho boy:

       I saw him rise before me like a spirit
       He was tall like one who learns on the Sun-rays.
       His broad feathers swayed like the crown of the Sun

The evident simile and hyperbole in these lines lead us not to the Navaho boy as
they evoke for us the grandeur of the Sun to which the Navaho boy is now being
likened. There is no doubt that the song of the Navaho boy is alluring and ethereal,
and that the poet- protagonist is entirely absorbed in the event. We are, therefore,
not surprised at the celebratory tone of the final lines of the poem:

       All hail to the creators of the earth.
       All hail to the singing voices of the morning.
       All hail to the Ever-Turning Eye of the universe.
       Let the red sky be cleansed by a blazing Sun.

Here, the Sun, “the Ever-Turning Eye of the Universe” has the powers to cleanse
“the red sky”, which can portend nothing but rage and violence.
   In one of the shortest poems in the collection, “Breaking off from Tradition”, the
poet-protagonist reminds us that “memory persists and punishes/Those who dare
224                                                                          D. U. Opata

forget the moment of their awakening”. But then, how does this “awakening” come
about? It is not by our power, but by the merciful intervention of the Sun. This is
why we are then further reminded that:

      Everyone is born into the terrors of the night
      There the guardians are fierce and do not sleep
      Bringing the constant promise of disaster
      But the Sun breaks open the line of the horizon
      And from it new faces rush from all directions,
      We are tempted to proclaim a new era.
      Yet it is only an illusion.
      When ultimately we cut the links of our past,
      It is only to trace the path of our deeper beginning.

Notice how complex and intricate these simple lines are. The phenomenon of birth
as a leap into the unknown is depicted as being thrown “into the terrors of the night”,
and because the night is perceived as dark and ghoulish in many cultures, it is gen-
erally believed that evil spirits pervade the night and therefore portend danger. On
another level, the earth itself could be read as constituting “the terrors of the night”
in which case life on earth is entirely perceived as a precarious one. The Sun repre-
senting the positive Other of the earth because life-giving and sustaining becomes
a redeemer, a deity that guides and guards people against “the terrors of the night”.
In other words, the Sun as redeemer, as bringer of light and dawn rescues humanity
from the darkness of the night. But the poet-protagonist cautions us against reading
a new dawn, “a new era” as just something that is novel and unrelated with over
history, with our beginning. The Sun “breaks open the line of the horizon” not to
put us into confusion because of the “new faces” that “rush from all directions”, but
to remind us of our roots, our origins, “the path of our deeper beginning:” This is
because, as the poet says in another poem, “Those who begin a new journey must
inherit the sacred staff/and through them the Sun must point to the centre of our
universe.”
   There are many other writers who employ the Sun as strong motifs in their
writing, but now, I turn to those who have represented the Moon in writing. The
Moon, like the Sun, is sometimes deified. The Moon is also seen as benevolent as
the Sun. Romanus Egudu (1981: 250–251) calls attention to a poetic song com-
posed at the installation of a chief at Owa in Enugu state, southeastern Nigeria. The
chief had chosen Onwa, Moon, as his title – name. The composer uses the occa-
sion of the installation to, perhaps, enlighten the chief on the nature of the Moon,
thus

      Son of Ojiwadu
      Moon that shines for Owa
      ...
      if you are the Moon-king
      that shines for the earth,
Cultural Astronomy in the Lore and Literature of Africa                          225

       [note that] the Moon never kills yams
       it never kills woman’s cocoyams.

Like the Sun as depicted by taban to liyong, the Moon shines for all, it does not
discriminate. But unlike the Sun, its light does not kill or lead to crops or plants
becoming blighted.
    It is not only that the Moon is benevolent; among the Igbo, the Moon is seen as
a unique and singular phenomenon. This is probably why it is very common as a
title name among the Igbo. Not long ago, a certain man, immersed in the frames
of western cosmology and worldview saw himself as a “star” among his people. In
choosing a title name, he opted for “kpakpando”, that is, star.
    You can imagine the man’s consternation when another kinsman who had earlier
taken the title Onwa, Moon, assembled children to sing the popular children’s song
drawn from an Igbo proberb: “Kpakpando gbara onwa na-uza, na onwa adigi abuo
na igwe” meaning: “star(s) give way to the Moon, there are no two Moons in the
sky”.
    The Moon is a fascinating phenomenon, and many writers have drawn inspira-
tion from it. One of the most significant of these writers is the Nigerian poet, Niyi
Osundare. One of books of poetry is titled Moonsongs (1988). One of the poems in
the collection is a definition of the Moon, thus:
                                some                      say
                                you                       moon
                                are                       the
                                ash                       es
                                of                        the
                                sun                       bath
                                ing                       limpid
                                night                     in
                                the                       grey
                                ing                       of
                                your                      silence
                                pallid                    echo
                                of                        solar
                                thunder                   s
                                are                       you



The entire book of poems is a celebration of the Moon as a phenomenon. But many
a time, the Moon is used to make a statement about contemporary social conditions:
urban slum as in poem XXII, tyranny as “Noonview”, etc. The Moon, “wife of the
Sun/Brother of the wind” (8), “the eye of the sky, the ear/of patient twilights, the
adder of looming seasons” (24) is also “mask dancing”. As the poet-protagonist
says:

       With its ears the Moon sees the Soweto of our skin
       And painfields so soggy with the sweat of a thousand seasons
226                                                                          D. U. Opata

But the Moon is also able to see into

      . . . the sorrows of our south deep, so deep
      like scars of millennial lessons.

The Moon is also used as a motif to contrast beauty and slum, as in poem XXII
where we are made to see
  Ikoyi

      The Moon here
      Is a laundered lawn
      Its grass the softness of infant fluff,
      Silence grazes like a joyous lamb,
      Doors romp on lazy hinges
      The ceiling is a sky
      Weighted down by chandeliers
      Of pampered stars

Ajegunle

      Here the Moon
      Is a jungle,
      Sad like a forgotten beard
      With tensioned climbers
      And undergrowths of cancerous fury;
      Cobras of anger spit in every brook
      And nights are one long prowl
      Of swindled leopards.

The too, reveals the impartiality of the Moon, recording what it sees the way it see it.


Functions of the Sun and Moon
The Moon is the commonest and best guides for the determination of indigenous
calendars. Again, there is abundant literature in traditional and indigenous calendars
not only in Africa, but also worldwide. I concern myself with the way literary writers
have utilized the Moon motif in the determination of time of events in their societies.
In Africa, the earliest and the most remarkable is in Chinua Achebe’s Arrow of God
(1964). The timing of events is so important to traditional peoples, and things could
go wrong both in the physical and spirit world when things do not take place the
time they are supposed to take place. This abiding concern with keeping accurate
time to endure the adequacy of events which take place in time informs the opening
of Arrow of God, thus:
Cultural Astronomy in the Lore and Literature of Africa                                         227

   This was the third nightfall since he began to look for signs of the new Moon. He knew it
   would be today but he always began his watch three days early because he must not take
   a risk. In this reason of the year his task was not too difficult, he did not have to peer and
   search the sky as the might do when the rains came. Then the new Moon sometimes hid
   itself for days behind rain came. Then the new Moon sometimes hid itself for days behind
   rain clouds so that when it finally came out it was already halfgrown. And while it played
   its game the chief priest sat up every evening waiting. . . The Moon he saw that mother. He
   peered more closely to make sure he was not deceived by a feather of cloud (1).

The passage here refers to the activities of the protagonist of the novel, Ezeulu,
Chief priest Ulu. As the custodian of the time-table of the events of the community,
umuaro, Ezeulu knows too well why “he must not take a risk” in ensuring that he
sights the New Moon on the exact day [Editors note: This is the first sighting of
the smallest crescent after New Moon]. When he finally sights the Moon the same
day, it is an unusual one that he sights. He does not fail in announcing to the people
that the new Moon has been sighted. He is also quick at performing the appropriate
rituals (3).
    The narrator does not fail to leave us without the people’s responses. The children
sing and rejoice over the appearance of the new Moon. The adults, represented by
Matefi, Ezeulu’s senior wife, and Ugoye, his younger wife, are more concerned with
understanding the nature of the new Moon. Ugoye begins the probing:

       ‘oho, I see it, Moon, may your face meeting mine bring good fortune.
            But how is it sitting? I don’t like its posture.’
       ‘why?’ asked Matefi
       ‘I think it sites awkwardly – like an evil Moon?
       ‘No’, said Matefi, ‘A bad Moon does not leave anyone in doubt.
       Like the one under which Okuata died. Its legs were up in the air’.

Here the notions of the goods and evil Moon are introduced. The way and manner
in which a new Moon is perceived determines whether it is a good or evil one. The
narrator uses the words, “posture”, and sitting “awkwardly” to describe this one.
Actually, the Igbo word would more appropriately translate as “the way the Moon
is staying/showing itself”. What is important is that the Igbo take time to observe a
new Moon to determine whether it portends good or bad for them. This is why there
is an Igbo saying to the effect that there is nothing that can be done to change the
way an ill-positioned new Moon shows itself.
    The conversation between Matefi and Ugoye foreshadow the tragic events which
trail the tragedy in the novel. Indeed, the entire tragedy of Arrow of God stems
from Ezeulu’s incarceration in the hands of the colonial masters, an incarceration
which prevents him from being present at Umuaro to eat one of the twelve sacred
yams which can only be eaten at each new Moon. For them, this new Moon was
an evil one, a bad omen. Even the next new Moon which was seen by Nwafo, one
of Ezeulu’s children during the time Ezeulu was still detained at Okperi is not a
good one. The narrator talks of it as a “young thin Moon” that “looked very thin
and reluctant” (166). Ezeulu could not announce the date of the New Yam Festival,
228                                                                                      D. U. Opata

leading a traumatized people to resort to church harvest as a way of eating the new
yam. The death of Obika, Ezeulu’s son and the mental disorientation which Ezeulu
himself suffers influence the people into believing that Ulu “had taken sides with
them against his headstrong and ambitions priest” (230). But the closing paragraph
of the novel is not categorical about this:
   If this was so than Ulu had chosen a dangerous time to uphold that truth for in destroying
   his priest he had also brought disaster on himself, like the lizard in the fable who ruined his
   mothers funeral by his own hand for a deity who chose a moment such as this to chastise his
   priest or abandon him before his enemies was inciting people to take liberties; and Umuaro
   was just ripe to do so. The Christian harvest, which took place, a few days after Obika’s
   death saw more people than even Goodconutry would have dreamed. In his extremity many
   a man sent his son with a yam or two to offer to the new religion and to bring back the
   promised immunity. Thereafter any yam harvested in his fields was harvested in the name
   of the son (230).



Conclusion
There are many more texts from which more examples could be taken to depict
the way in which the Sun and the Moon are depicted in creative expressions in
Africa. One immediately thinks of Peter K. Palangyo’s Dying in the Sun. Although
this title is not discussed in this essay, the evident paradox in the titling provides
the illumination for this conclusion. Ordinarily, the Sun is always the usherer of a
new dawn, a new life, a new beginning, but it has in itself the potential of violence,
which could lead to death. It is this potential for violence, or is it the actualization
of such a potential that is depicted in a “Hymn to the Sun” of Anthills of the Sa-
vannah. If the Sun provides violenence in this novel, even apparently taking sides
and aligning powers with a dictatorial regime, the Moon takes no sides in Arrow of
God. And although the dominant motif in the novel enthrones it as the sole symbol
for synchronization of events for the people of Umuaro, it is aloof to the trauma the
people undergo. It is no wonder then that the people begin to look in the direction
of the new faith for an escape route. So, in the end, the Moon may be the popular
entity after which people may fashion title names, it may kill neither the yam of
man nor the cocoyam of women, but it may have no devotees, no shrines erected in
her honour because it has neither power nor ambivalence. The Sun, life-giving and
life-destroying, is the hero, the deity that graces the entrance to every traditional
Igbo compound.


References
Achebe, Chinua. Arrow of God. London: Heinemann 1964, 2nd ed.
        , Anthills of the Savannah. Ibadan: Heinemann Educational Books.
Biebuyck, Daniel and Kahombo C. Mateene Eds. The Mwindo Epic from the Banya (Congo Re-
   public) Berkeley: University of Clifornia Press, 1969.
Egudu, R.N. “The Igbo Experience”. In Oral Poetry in Nigeria. Eds Abalogu, Uchegbulam N. et al.
   Eds, Lagos : Nigeria Magazine, 1981.
Cultural Astronomy in the Lore and Literature of Africa                                  229

Kunene, Mazisi. The Ancestors and the Sacred Mountain : Poem London: Heinemann, 1982.
Liyong, Taban I. “The Sun is my God And I shall Worship Him When He Rises, Reaches His
   Zenith, and Reposes for the Night”. In Ballads of Under-Development. Kampala: East Africa
   Literature Bureau; 1969.
Osundare, Niyi. Moonsongs. Ibadan: Spectrum Books, 1988.
Raa, Eric Ten. “The Moon as a Symbol of Life and Fertility in Sandawe Thought”.
Parrinder, Geoffry. African mythology. London: Paul Hamlyn, 1967.
Umeh, John Anenechukwu. After God Is Dibia: Igbo Cosmology, Healing, Divination of Sacred
   Science in Nigerian. 2 Vols, London: Karnak.
Wagner, Gunter. “The Abaluyia of Kavirondo (Kenya)”. In African Worlds: Studies in the Cosmo-
   logical Ideas and Social Values of African People. London: Oxford University Press, 1954.
Astronomy and Culture in Nigeria

J. O. Urama




Abstract Astronomy cannot be said to be entirely new in Nigeria. There are hundreds
of cosmogony and ancient astronomical practices in Nigeria, but these need to be
studied systematically. Nigerian ethnoastronomy is revealed in the folklore, ancient
architecture, religious practices, traditional poetry and art works of the different ethnic
groups. Though expressed within a cultural framework, much of Nigerian ethnoas-
tronomy contains scientific principles of astronomy. This paper discusses the need to
bridge the gap between ethnoastronomy in Nigeria and modern astronomy by provid-
ing scientific interpretation to such cosmogonies and ancient astronomical practices.



Introduction

Astronomy has been said to be “a science that has a universal appeal because it
encompasses all fields of human interest and endeavour” (Celebre & Soriano 2001).
It has been argued that, “astronomy is more than the science of stars; it is inti-
mately connected to our ideas of ourselves, our purpose and place in the universe”
(Campion 2003). As the science that provides the framework knowledge of where
we, and the planet on which we live, fit into the environment of the universe, as-
tronomy is a vital part of the culture of all mankind. A person deprived of the
broad outlines of astronomical knowledge is as culturally handicapped as one never
exposed to history, literature, music or art (NRAO Bulletin).
   The description of creation told by followers of cabbala, – a form of Jewish
mysticism – for example, has been interpreted (Wertheim 1997) along modern cos-
mological views. The cabbalists developed a theoretical system portraying God as
having ten aspects, known in Hebrew as the sephirot. Beyond the sephirot is Ein Sof,
the unknowable aspect of God, from which emanated a light that created the sephirot
and the physical universe. Of the ten sephirot the first three deal with creation, and
they correspond fairly closely to the concepts from the cosmological theories. In


Johnson Urama
University of Nigeria, Nsukka +234 42 771107
E-mail: johnsonurama@yahoo.com


J. Holbrook et al. (eds.), African Cultural Astronomy – Current Archaeoastronomy
and Ethnoastronomy Research in Africa.     C Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2008   231
232                                                                       J. O. Urama

Nigeria, there are hundreds of such theories about creation, life and living, etc.,
that need to be studied likewise systematically to reveal connections to modern cos-
mological views and astronomy principles. As observed by Kunene (1980), “each
society is concerned with its destiny within the cosmic arena; without this perspec-
tive, the society can only be stampeded into directions it does not fully comprehend
or does not feel ready to follow.” In this paper, I highlight the need to investigate
some of the culture and traditions of the different ethnic groups of Nigeria with a
view to re-interpreting this body of knowledge in the light of modern astronomy.



Modern Astronomy in Nigeria

Modern astronomy came into Nigeria only four decades ago. Many universities and
research centres in Nigeria have been involved with teaching and research in astron-
omy for many years. This was first introduced in the Departments of Mathematics
of the University of Nigeria, Nsukka, in 1962. From Mathematics, it moved to the
Department of Physics of the same university, which later became the Department
of Physics and Astronomy. In the past ten years, astronomy programs have been
introduced in four other Universities in the South-eastern Nigeria, mostly at the
graduate level. Nigeria also hosts an international centre in Ile-Ife involved with
space science, – the African Regional Centre for Space Science and Technology
Education in English Language (ARCSSTE-E), which was inaugurated in Novem-
ber 1998. And two years later the National Centre for Basic Space Science was set
up at Nsukka with the mandate to conduct and carry out active frontline research in
Atmospheric Science and Astronomy. However, despite these advances astronomy
remains largely unpopular in Nigeria. There are only about a dozen professional as-
tronomers and no amateur astronomers in the country since it is popularly perceived
to be of only esoteric interest and devoid of any practical and economic value.
   It is, however, worthy of note that a Nigerian – Samuel Okoye – was the first
black African to obtain a doctorate in radio astronomy. His doctoral research at
the Mullard Radio Astronomy Observatory, University of Cambridge, led to the
discovery – with his supervisor, Dr Tony Hewish – of an extremely high brightness
temperature source in the Crab Nebula recognized as the first example of a neutron
star. This source later turned out to be none other than the famous Crab Nebula
Pulsar. The discovery was widely recognized of being of fundamental importance
to basic physics and for which Prof. Hewish was awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics
in 1974.
   Dr. Okoye returned to Nigeria to set up a radio observatory in Nsukka. His initial
efforts to set up a space research centre was frustrated by lack of funds until in
1977 when the late Dr. Nnamdi Azikiwe made a handsome donation of the sum of
one hundred thousand Naira (about US $150,000 then) towards creating the space
centre. “With this initial assistance Professor Okoye and his group were able to set
up a 10-m dish operating at 327 MHz as the initial facility of the group. This was
done with a little assistance from University of California. With little funding and
Astronomy and Culture in Nigeria                                                    233

little international technical support a lot of indigenous technology was built into
the project. With this facility, the centre planned to carry out the following projects:
a two station pulsar observation with India, a Very Long Baseline Interferometer
(VLBI) observation programme with Germany...All these experiments involve sign-
ing of agreements with other governments and some financial support. There was no
support from the Nigerian government or from any other source, as a result, all the
above mentioned projects could not commence. Since no serious activity was taking
place around the telescope, which was situated in a remote corner of the University,
as is usual with radio instruments, the dish and all the facilities were vandalized”
(Okeke 1999).



Overview of Cultural Astronomy of Various Regions in Nigeria
The Hausa speaking tribal nation of West Africa have a good number of myths and
folktales about the sun, moon and the stars. The stars are said to visit each other
and talk. There are even names for the constellations, a typical example being the
Pleiades, a star cluster that appears at the commencement of the rains, which is
known as kaza Maiyaya (the Hen with Chickens) and, “the morning-star in harvest
time (probably α-Aquila) is known as the eagle star” (Tremearne 1970). One of
their folktales has it that the moon and the sun were friendly until they gave birth.
Then the sun called the moon and asked him to hold her daughter while she went
and washed herself. The moon took the sun’s daughter, but was not able to hold it,
for it burnt him, and he let it go, and it fell to the earth – that is why people feel
hot on earth. When the sun returned, she asked the moon where her daughter was,
and the moon replied, “Your daughter was burning me so I let her go, and she fell to
earth”. Because of that the sun pursues the moon. Another legend is that the moon’s
path is full of thorns, while that of the sun is sandy, and on that account the moon
cannot travel quickly, as does the sun. So when the moon can proceed no farther,
he gets on the sun’s path, and the sun catches him. When the sun has caught him
the people take their drums and ask the sun to spare the moon. This “catching-up”
occurs during an eclipse of the sun.
    In Igala land, when such an eclipse happens it is believed that the world wants
to come to an end, so the people would start beating the drums, buckets, plates and
bowls as a praise to their gods to spare the world. And when the eclipse is over they
would start chanting, “thanks be to our gods for they have heard our prayers”. Here,
it is also believed that the moon has two wives – and these are the brightest stars that
stay very close to the moon when it appears in the night, the most loved one staying
closest to him (Joan Edime, private communication).
    Yoruba is the second largest ethno-linguistic group in Nigeria. In Yoruba cos-
mogony, Obatala was issued with the task of building the Earth by Sky God Olorun,
who gave him blueprints, a handful of mud, a chain, a five-toed chicken, and detailed
instructions. Unfortunately, on his way to perform this important task, Obatala acci-
dentally gate crashed a God-party and spent the rest of the evening roaring, drunk on
234                                                                               J. O. Urama

palm wine. Seeing the chance for fame and glory, his younger brother, Oduduwa,
stole the holy building materials and attempted to jerry-build the Earth himself.
Advised by a friendly chameleon, he lowered the chain over the edge of heaven,
climbed down, and tossed the lump of mud into the primeval sea. The chicken
hopped onto the mud and began scratching it in all directions. Pretty soon there was
a decent size landscape and thus was the Earth born (Saunders & Ramsey 2004).
Oduduwa, the first Ooni (traditional ruler) of Ife, is the father of the Yorubas and
progenitor of all Yoruba Oba’s (traditional rulers) and the Oba of Benin. Oduduwa is
believed to have had 16 sons who later became powerful traditional rulers of Yoruba
land, most notably Alafin of Oyo, Ooni of Ife, Oragun of Ila, Owa of Ilesha, Alake
of Abeokuta and Osemawe of Ondo. Oduduwa is believed to have left a beaded
crown for Yoruba, and the Ooni of Ife wears this up till now (Fig. 1). The Ooni
wears the crown only once a year at the Olojo festival and it is believed to have
curative powers as any prayer said once the Ooni adorns the crown is said to be
answered.
    The Igbo, like every other people, have observed their natural environment and
interacted with it. The Igbo have had to live in very close proximity and intimacy
with nature. In Igboland, unlike the situation with the Edo, Yoruba and Hausa, there
is a dearth of written material for the period before the 19th century. Although an
ideograph (sign-language), nsibidi,had been in use, literacy as it is understood to-
day, was introduced into Igboland after the first European visitors (John & Richard
Lander) traveled down the lower Niger down to the Niger Delta in 1830.




Fig. 1 A village shrine in Nsude, Enugu State of Nigeria. Photograph was taken in the 1930s by
the late G.I. Jones.
(Source: Museum of Archeology and Anthropolgy, University of Cambridge.)
Astronomy and Culture in Nigeria                                                   235

    In Igbo land the supreme being Chukwu is commonly identified with the sun
(Anyanwu) so that the supreme being is often described as Anyanwu Eze Chukwu
Okike (The sun, the Lord God, the creator). In the Nsukka area, almost every
household in those days had a shrine to Anyanwu in his compound consisting of
a round pottery dish sunk into the ground bottom upwards at the base of an ogbu
tree. There can be little doubt that this pottery dish is used to represent the sun’s
disc. Offerings at the shrine are usually made at sunrise or sunset. In some cases the
Anyanwu (sun-god) shrine is a mound of sand as is shown in Fig. 2. The mound of
sand, just like the pottery dish, may be a representation of the sun’s disc.
    Among the Jukun (a neighbouring ethnic group to the Igbo) of the Benue basin
there is the same partial identification of the sun with the supreme being and it is
noteworthy that the Jukun words for sun and supreme being viz: Nyunu (Anu) and
Chi-do embody the same roots as the terms used by the Igbo. In the Okpoto groups
the sun is called Enu and the sun-god Olenu. It is interesting to note that Heliopolis
the centre of sun-worship in Ancient Egypt was known by the Egyptians as Anu. It
is also noteworthy that the use of mounds of sand in connection with Sun-rites was
common in Egypt and that among the Jukun today the Sun-altars are two mounds
of sand (Meek 1930).
    In many places in Igbo land, the general life of the community still largely hinges
on the lunar calendar and the people look up to the king-priests who determine
agricultural seasons based on the lunar calendar. These priests examine the motions
of the sun, moon and even the planets in some cases, to come up with the calendar.
Each lunar month has a name, a ritual associated with it and also an economic
activity specially connected with it. Each moon (month) has seven market weeks
(Izu asaa) and each week (izu) is four days, that is Eke, Oye (Orie), Afor and Nkwo.
The Igbo year consists of twelve lunar months (354 days) and as this falls short of




Fig. 2 A village shrine in Ovoko, Enugu State of Nigeria
236                                                                                J. O. Urama

Table 1 The calendar of Umuawulu town
Moon                           Event                             Calendar
Onwa Mvu (I)                     Ogugu Aho                       Afor before Moon appears
                                                                 May/June
Onwa Ibo (II)                    Onwa Ibo feast                  Afo, June
Onwa Ito (III)                   Akwali Chukwu feast
                                 Akwali Omufu Ritual             July
                                 Iba na Akwu-Ozo
Onwa Ano (IV)                    Ikpa Unwu ritual                August
Onwa Ise (V)                     Fejioku ritual                  Oye
                                 Okike-Onwa-Ise feast            Eke
                                 Okpukpo Ngu                     Oye, September
Onwa Ishi (VI)                   Nshi Ji                         Afo
                                 Ikpo Ngu                        Oye, October
Onwa Isa (VII)                   Mgba Ajana                      Nkwo
                                 Egwu Aruja                      Eke, November
Onwa Asato (VIII)                Olili Kamanu                    Izu n’ese onwa
                                 Onwa Asato feast                Afo (izu ato onwa)
                                 Ikpo Ngu Onwa                   Eke
                                 Asato                           Eke (izu ise onwa), December
                                 Okike Onwa Asato
Onwa Iteghete (IX)               Olili Onwa teghete              Afo, Izu n’ato onwa
                                 (women feast)                   January
Onwa Ili (X)                     Okpukpo Oye feast               Oye, Izu n’ato onwa, February
Di Okpala Onwa Ili (XI)          Obele Ede (women)               Eke, March
Onwa Uwhoro I (XII)              Nnukwu Ede                      Afo, April
Onwa Uwhoro II (XIII)            – do –                          May




Fig. 3 A wall typical painting, which could be portraying some astronomical information
Astronomy and Culture in Nigeria                                                           237

the solar year by eleven days it is necessary to add a thirteenth month from time
to time so as to make the year correspond with the seasons. The thirteenth month,
when introduced is usually a “nameless”, “void” or “lost” month.
   The calendar of Umuawulu (Anambra State), a typical community in Igbo land,
is as shown in Table 1 (Nkala 1982). Yam-planting controls the timing of all the
festivals in Umuawulu. The significant thing is that Onwa mvu (first month) is the
beginning of the farming season for the entire community. It must be properly syn-
chronized with the coming of the rains, or else the whole clan would be ruined for
the whole year.
   The Igbo has a mystical symbolism understood and used by dibias (diviners and
herbalists). Some of these mystical symbolisms have information on the solar and
astral systems buried in them (Umeh 1999). Figure 3 shows a typical example of
such symbolisms.


Conclusions

Like ancient people everywhere, Nigerians wondered at the sky and struggled to
make sense of it. So, while modern astronomy may be quite new and unpopular in
Nigeria, ancient architecture, folklore, myths, religion, calendars, etc. are quite rich
in astronomy. The cultural astronomy of the West African sub-region, and Nigeria
in particular, is among the least investigated in the African continent. Ancient astro-
nomical practices of parts of Southern and Northern Africa have been relatively well
studied. Nigeria’s endogenous astronomy is as diverse as her over 300 ethnic groups.
Most of the ethnic groups have astronomy-rich cultures, hence there are hundreds
of ethnic cosmogonies and mythologies that need to be studied systematically. Such
a study would investigate various aspects of the culture and tradition of the diverse
ethnic groups of Nigeria and seek to re-interpret this body of knowledge in the
light of modern astronomy. This is an interdisciplinary research field and would
provide a good opportunity for collaborative works by astronomers/astrophysicists,
anthropologists, archaeologists, religionists, and other humanistic scholars.


References
Campion, N. Introduction: Cultural Astronomy in Astrology and the Academy, ed. N. Campion
   (Bristol, Cinnabar Books, 2003) p. xv
Celebre, C.P. & Soriano, B.M. Promotion of Astronomy in the Philippines”. IAU Commission 46
   Newsletter 54 (2001) p. 7
Kunene, M. The Relevance of African Cosmological Systems to African Literature (African Liter-
   ature Today. Ed. D.J. Eldred) (Heinemann, 1980), p. 190
Meek, C.K. Unpublished Ethnographical report on the peoples of Nsukka Division, Onitsha
   province, (National Archives, Enugu, 1930), paragraphs 220–223
Okeke, P.N. Basic Space Science and Technology in Nigeria in the 21st Century (Preparations for
   a take-of, 1999). A public lecture organized by the Nigerian Academy of Sciences
Nkala, N. Traditional Festivals in Umuawulu: A survey. M.A. Project Report. Department of
   English, University of Nigeria, (Nsukka, 1982)
238                                                                             J. O. Urama

Saunders, C. & Ramsey, P. (2004). http://www.godchecker.com
Tremearne, A.J.N. Hausa Superstitions and Customs (Frank Cass & Co., London, 1970), p.114
Umeh, J.A. After God is Dibia, vol 2. (Karnak House, London, 1999) p. 209
Wertheim, M. New Scientist 156(2101), (1997), p. 28
Participation and Research of Astronomers
and Astrophysicists of Black African Descent
(1900–2005)

Hakeem M. Oluseyi and Johnson Urama




Abstract The second half of the Twentieth Century witnessed the emergence of
the first modern Astronomers and Astrophysicists of Black African descent. In this
paper we enumerate these researchers and briefly describe their activities. We also
describe the broader social and political contexts which have impacted their par-
ticipation and research. We focus primarily on researchers in the United States
of America (28) and in Nigeria (19) who have together produced over 90% of
the astronomical researchers known to the authors. We briefly mention researchers
from other countries including South Africa (3) and in Eurasia (2). We conclude
by describing the pioneering researchers and disseminators of the Black African
Diaspora’s contribution of to the modern astronomical sciences.




Introduction
The 20th century saw substantial change in the collective lot of Africans and the
African Diaspora. The century began with nearly every African nation suffering under
colonial rule and African Americans enduring the daily violence and humiliation that
characterized the Jim Crow era. Seven decades later, Africa had shed its colonial rulers
but their imperial legacy had bestowed widespread suffering whose effects linger until
today. In America, the violence, segregation, and state-sponsored discrimination that
plagued the Jim Crow era were reduced to lower levels, though not eradicated. Yet, in
the face of these challenging environments, the 20th Century witnessed the emergence
of the first professional astronomers and astrophysicists of African decent. Here we
review the participation and research activities of these scholars.
   We denote researchers of Black African descent who successfully entered into
professional careers in the astronomical sciences. We define a successful profes-
sional astrophysical researcher as one with a substantial scientific publication record


Hakeem M. Oluseyi
Florida Institute of Technology (321) 674-7247
E-mail: holuseyi@fit.edu


J. Holbrook et al. (eds.), African Cultural Astronomy – Current Archaeoastronomy
and Ethnoastronomy Research in Africa.     C Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2008   239
240                                                            H. M. Oluseyi, J. Urama

in the fields of astronomy, astrophysics, or cosmology, post-Ph.D. We exclude
geophysicists, engineers and other support personnel who engage professionally in
the astronomical sciences including educators and public outreach personnel. One
trend that complicates matters is that there exists several researchers who performed
astrophysical research during the acquisition of their doctorate degrees, but have
not published the results of astrophysics research beyond this work. There is an
additional complication introduced for those whose research lay at the intersections
of astronomy and other fields such as mathematics and physics.
   This review, while exhaustive, is recognized as not being complete. It is likely
that there are, or have been researchers in Europe, Asia, South America and else-
where who are currently unknown to the authors. Given these limitations, this review
will nonetheless coalesce into one document a general overview of our topic which
is more complete and accurate than has been previously presented.



African American Participation and Research

The Pioneers (1956–1965)
It was in the segregated 1950s that the first African American began his career as
a professional astrophysical researcher. In 1956, Carl Rouse graduated from the
California Institute of Technology with a Ph.D. in Physics. Over the next decade,
from 1956 to 1965, four more African Americans would follow him into profes-
sional astrophysics careers. Harvey Banks became the first African American to
graduate with a Ph.D. in the field of Astronomy, earned from Georgetown Univer-
sity in 1961. The very next year saw two more astrophysicists begin their careers.
In 1962, Benjamin Peery completed a Ph.D. in Astronomy from the University
of Michigan and Arthur B. C. Walker, Jr. completed a Ph.D. in Physics from the
University of Illinois. George Carruthers completed a Ph.D. in Physics from the
University of Illinois in 1964 to round out the first five African American astro-
physics researchers.
    Four of these first five researchers enjoyed distinguished research careers and
three enjoyed distinguished academic careers. The astronomical research accom-
plishments of Dr. Rouse are perhaps best exemplified by his pioneering utilization of
the supercomputer resources at Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory to create
detailed models of the solar core [1]. He was the first to solve the Saha equation in
the center of the Sun, which determines the degree of ionization there. Dr. Rouse
continuously refined his models of the solar core, first published in 1961, which
ultimately lead to a publication in the prestigious British journal Nature in 1969
[2]. He went on to publish 44 single author public publications over 35 years. He
spent his early career at Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory (LLNL) where he
focused on research in quantum mechanics theory. LLNL is a government national
laboratory, which performs substantial defense-related research. Most likely then,
a great portion of his research output produced there remains unpublished publicly.
Participation and Research of Astronomers and Astrophysicists                      241

He spent the later portion of his career in private industry yet continued to model the
solar core, incorporating the latest helioseismology data from satellites and ground
based observatories into his models [3].
    Benjamin Peery is perhaps most famous for being the first African American as-
tronomer to be shown on U.S. national television thanks to a 1991 PBS documentary,
“The Astronomers.” Prior to this groundbreaking appearance, most Americans would
have been unaware that a single Black astronomer had ever existed. Although he
would later appear in the 1997 video, “Stardust,” Peery’s accomplishments extend far
beyond media appearances. His research utilizing stellar spectroscopy investigated
the physics of stellar structure, evolution, and nucleosynthesis, and the physics of
interacting binary stars. He was particularly noted for identifying novel species in
stellar atmospheres like Technetium, an element first discovered in the spectra of
Red Giant stars in 1952, whose presence was used to bolster the then young theory
that the heavy elements are produced in stars [4]. His studies on the violet spectra of
stars would also result in the discovery of some novel molecules [5]. His academic
career spanned 20 years at Indiana University then finally at Howard University. He
was responsible for teaching stellar spectroscopy to several successful astronomical
researchers including John D. Fix, author of the popular American undergraduate
astronomy textbook, “Astronomy: Journey to the Cosmic Frontier” [6].
    Dr. Arthur B. C. Walker, II, enjoyed a very distinguished career of research and
academics. In the 1960s, Dr. Walker, with collaborator H. R. Rugge, was the first to
obtain satellite-borne astronomical x-ray spectra, using a Bragg crystal spectrometer
of their own construction [7]. Walker performed this work while a senior member
of the technical staff of The Aerospace Corporation. In 1972 he joined the faculty of
Stanford University in the department of Applied Physics. There he was the Ph.D.
advisor of Sally Ride, America’s first woman in space. Years later, Walker and Ride
would both serve on the committee which investigated the explosion of the Space
Shuttle Challenger. In the 1980s Walker’s pioneering achievements included acqui-
sition of the first high-resolution, full-disk images of the Sun using soft x-ray and
extreme ultraviolet (EUV) multilayer optics flown on a sounding rocket platform
[8]. After this revolutionary work was introduced to the world via the cover of the
prestigious American journal, Science, multilayer technology has now become the
standard in solar EUV imaging. In the 1990s, Walker pioneered thermally differ-
entiated imaging of the Sun’s atmosphere with his Multi-Spectral Solar Telescope
Array (MSSTA) rocket payload [9]. In his academic career Dr. Walker was the
mentor not only Sally Ride but also two younger African American astrophysics
researchers during the 1990s, Dr. Ray H. O’Neal and Dr. Hakeem M. Oluseyi. As
such, Dr. Walker is the only African American astronomer to have produced other
African American astronomers. Overall, ten of Dr. Walker’s Ph.D. students are em-
ployed today as researchers with six of these being Professors at U.S. universities.
    Rounding out the first five is Dr. George Carruthers. Dr. Carruthers is best
known for being the Principal Inventor for the Lunar Surface Far Ultraviolet Cam-
era/Spectrograph that was placed on the moon’s surface in April 1972 during the
Apollo 16 mission [10]. Carruther’s instrument was the first human observatory to
be placed on an extraterrestrial body and was also the first observatory to monitor
242                                                              H. M. Oluseyi, J. Urama

ultraviolet emissions from Earth’s extended atmosphere. Carruthers’ work extends
far beyond these initial results. He has built instruments for several rocket mis-
sions to study the ultraviolet universe including stars, nebulae, and galaxies, ex-
tending back to 1967. His more recent activities include developing instruments
for space shuttle missions and satellite missions including Skylab and the ARGOS
satellite. Dr. Carruthers holds two patents for his ultraviolet imaging technologies.
Dr. Carruthers, though not an academician per se, has worked diligently in science
education activities over several years. He has been involved in several public out-
reach programs particularly aimed at African American students living in America’s
capitol, Washington, D.C.



Two Decades of Struggle (1966–1985)
The first decade of African American participation in professional astrophysics re-
sulted in the production of one scholar every other year on average. It would take
more than 20 years to produce the next five professional researchers. Indeed, eight
years would pass between the year of Dr. Carruthers’ Ph.D. and that of the next suc-
cessful researcher, Charles McGruder. Moreover, American society was embroiled
in the civil rights movement of the 1960s during this same period. These events
played an integral part in shaping the roles of African American astrophysicists for
two decades. In the late 1960s it appeared to many young African Americans that
their futures were limited in the U.S. because of racial discrimination. Rather than
staying in the U.S. to accomplish his graduate studies, young Charles McGruder
found himself immigrating to the more tranquil atmosphere of Europe where he
obtained a Ph.D. in Astrophysics from the University of Heidelberg in Germany in
1972. After graduating, McGruder worked in sub-Saharan African countries includ-
ing Kenya and Nigeria. He later returned to America where he made it his priority
to facilitate the entry of young African Americans into astronomical research. His
tireless efforts in this regard have led to the creation of new funding and jobs for
minority astronomers.
    The era from 1966 to 1985 differed from the first decade not only in the num-
ber of scholars produced, but also in the fields chosen. The first four researchers
focused their activities primarily on stellar systems. Also, half of the original four
were experimentalists. Dr. McGruder became the first African American to study
extragalactic systems. Ron Mallet, who received his Ph.D. in 1973 from Penn State
University, was the first African American to work on gravity, black holes, and time
travel. These topics lay at the intersections of physics, astronomy, and philosophy.
The next researcher, Gibor Basri, received his Ph.D. from the University of Colorado
in Boulder in 1979. A throwback to the first decade of researchers, Dr. Basri focused
his research interests on stellar systems. He is perhaps best known for his pioneering
work on using the lithium test to identify sub-stellar objects (or failed stars), known
as brown dwarfs [11]. In 1981, Barbara Williams became the first female African
American to successfully enter into a professional astronomical research career. She
Participation and Research of Astronomers and Astrophysicists                   243

received her Ph.D. in 1981 from the University of Maryland, College Park. Her
research has focused on radio emission from groups of galaxies.


The Upturn in Participation (1986–1995)

The decade beginning in 1986 witnessed a sharp upturn in the rate of production
for African American astronomers. On average, an African American successfully
began a professional astrophysics career each year from 1986 to 1995. In 1986
Mercedes Richards, a native of Jamaica, received a Ph.D. from the University of
Toronto and moved to the US for her professional career, becoming the second fe-
male astronomical researcher of Black African descent in the U.S. Her research has
focused on close interacting binary stars. She has also achieved several “firsts” in
astronomy. Using the technique of Doppler tomography, Dr. Richards obtained the
first images of gas streams in interacting binary stars [12], the first UV tomogram
of an Algol-type binary [13], and the first 3D tomography of an Algol-type binary
[14]. In 1987 Charles “Chick” Woodward received a Ph.D. from the University of
Rochester. His research has focused on star formation processes. In 1988 Alphonse
Sterling received a Ph.D. from the University of New Hampshire. He has focused
his research on the study of dynamic phenomena in the Sun’s atmosphere.
    The three years from 1990 to 1992 were the most productive three years for
producing African American astronomical researchers ever, with five beginning
their careers during this time period. In 1990 Leonard Strachan received a Ph.D. in
physics from Harvard focusing his research on solar physics. In 1991 Arlie Petters
received a Ph.D. in mathematics from MIT and made substantial contributions to
the topic of strong gravitational lensing, a powerful tool for cosmology. In 1991
Neil Tyson received his Ph.D. from Columbia University focusing on dwarf stars
but now focuses on galaxy formation and evolution. Dr. Tyson is best known for
being the director of the Hayden Planetarium in New York. He has had numerous
television appearances and written several popular books on astronomy and society.
He is now, without question, the most famous of the African American astronomers.
Reva K. Williams received her Ph.D. in 1991 from the University of Indiana. She
was the first to work out the details of using the Penrose mechanism for extracting
energy from a black hole. In 1992 Eric Wilcots received a Ph.D. in Astronomy from
the University of Washington studying the evolution of galaxies and the gas within
galaxies. Dr. Wilcots, like Arthur Walker and Charles McGruder, has also been a
mentor of astronomers of Black African descent. He has played a role in the careers
of two South African astronomers and at least one African American astronomer. In
1994 Ray O’Neal, a protégé of Dr. A. B. C. Walker, II, received a Ph.D. in Physics
from Stanford University where he contributed to the development and launch of
Dr. Walker’s MSSTA payload and studied solar plasma loops utilizing MSSTA
data. Finally, in 1995, Stanley Davis received a Ph.D. from Catholic University of
America where he studied gamma ray bursts. Overall, the rate of African American
astrophysics researchers produced from 1986 to 1995 represents more than a factor
of four increase over the production rate of the previous two decades.
244                                                              H. M. Oluseyi, J. Urama

The Recent Period
The period from 1996–2005 saw a 20% decrease in the number of African Ameri-
can astronomical researchers produced. Indeed, at least two of the eight researchers
produced during this period have taken positions devoted primarily to educational
activities, which have adversely affected their research output.
    The first researcher produced in the recent decade was Aaron Evans who received
a Ph.D. in Astronomy from the University of Hawaii in (1996). He has had a pro-
lific research career focused on the observation and analysis of colliding galaxies.
Jarita Holbrook received her Ph.D. in Astronomy from the University of California,
Santa Cruz in 1997. Though her dissertation focused on star formation in molecular
clouds, Dr. Holbrook is best known as “the mother of African cultural astronomy.”
She is a pioneer in the emerging field of African cultural astronomy, which seeks
to uncover and preserve the astronomy knowledge of African societies. She is also
known as the world’s expert on stellar navigation from this part of the world. Jason
Best received a Ph.D. in Astronomy from Penn State University in 1997, research-
ing galaxy clustering. Beth Brown received a Ph.D. in Astronomy 1998 from the
University of Michigan. She has focused her research on the interstellar medium
of galaxies. Dara Norman received a Ph.D. in Astronomy from the University of
Washington in 1999. She has focused her research on the observation and analysis
of the universe’s large scale structure. Though not of African descent, Sarah Heap
of Goddard Space Flight Center mentored both Jarita Holbrook and Dara Norman
before they received their Ph.Ds, thus making a significant contribution to the ca-
reers of African American Women in Astronomy. Hakeem M. Oluseyi, a protégé of
Dr. A. B. C. Walker, II, received a Ph.D. in Physics from Stanford University in
2000. His broad research activities in technology development, solar physics, cos-
mology, and African cultural astronomy have resulted in eight patents based on the
discovery of processes for manufacturing microchips with very small metal gates
[15] and spectroscopic processes for improving the efficiency of microchip manu-
facturing in general [16]. In addition to his technology patents, Dr. Oluseyi’s discov-
eries include being the first to determine the structure of the Sun’s upper transition
region [17] and discovering the “wax candle flying flame effect” at age 11 [18].
Stephon Alexander received a Ph.D. in Physics from Brown University in 2000. His
research in quantum gravity lays at the intersection of physics and astronomy. He is
the only theorist produced in the recent decade. Finally, Louis Strolger received a
Ph.D. in Astronomy from the University of Michigan in 2002. A prolific researcher,
Dr. Strolger has focused his work in observational cosmology, utilizing Type Ia
supernovae to measure the expansion history of the universe and investigate the dark
energy that has been invoked to account for the universe’s accelerating expansion.


Broad Trends in Participation and Research (1900–2005)
Table 1 gives the names, fields of research, educational institutions and current
positions of 27 of the 28 African American astrophysics scholars produced between
Table 1 African American Astronomical Researchers
         Last                First            Year                Ph.D. Institution    Research Interests           Type         Location
1         Rouse                Carl               1956            Caltech              Solar Physics                theory       L/PI
2         Banks                Harvey             1961            Georgetown U         Educator                     observer     U
3         Walker               Arthur             1962            U IL                 Solar Physics                experiment   U
4         Peery                Benjamin           1962            U Michigan           Stellar Spectroscopy         observer     U
5         Carruthers           George             1964            U IL                 UV Instrumentation           experiment   L
6         McGruder             Charles            1972            U Heidelberg         AGN & GRBs                   observer     U
7         Mallett              Ron                1973            Penn State           Gravity, Time Travel         theory       U
8         Basri                Gibor              1979            U CO, Boulder        Very Low Mass Stars          observer     U
9         Williams             Barbara            1981            U MD, College Park   Radio Galaxy Groups          observer     U
10        Richards             Mercedes           1986            U Toronto            Close Interacting Binaries   observer     U
11        Woodward             Charles E.         1987            U Rochester          Star Formation               observer     U
12        Sterling             Alphonse           1988            U New Hampshire      Solar Physics                observer     L
13        Strachan             Leonard            1990            Harvard U            Solar Physics                observer     L
14        Petters †            Arlie              1991            MIT                  Gravitational Lensing        theory       U
15        Tyson                Neil               1991            Columbia U           Dwarf Galaxies               observer     PT
16        Williams             Reva               1991            U Indiana            Penrose Mechanism            observer     U
17        Wilcots              Eric               1992            U Washington         Gas/Galaxy Evolution         observer     U
18        O’Neal               Ray                1994            Stanford U           Solar Physics                experiment   U
                                                                                                                                            Participation and Research of Astronomers and Astrophysicists




19        Davis                Stanley            1995            Catholic U. of Am    GRBs                         observer     PT
20        Evans                Aaron              1996            U HI                 Colliding Galaxies           observer     U
21        Holbrook             Jarita             1997            UCSC                 Cultural Astronomy           historian    U
22        Best                 Jason              1997            Penn State U         Galaxy Clustering            observer     U
23        Brown                Beth               1998            U Michigan           Galaxy ISM                   observer     L
24        Norman               Dara               1999            U Washington         Weak Lensing, LSS            observer     L
25        Oluseyi              Hakeem             2000            Stanford U           Solar Physics                experiment   U
26        Alexander †          Stephon            2000            Brown U              Quantum Gravity              theory       U
27        Strolger             Louis              2002            U Michigan           Supernova Cosmology          observer     U
U – University; L – Laboratory; PT – Planetarium; PI – Industry
† indicates research lies primarily outside astronomy
                                                                                                                                            245
246                                                                                   H. M. Oluseyi, J. Urama

                      5



                      4



                      3
                                                                                             Solar
      # Astronomers
        Produced                                                                             Extragalactic
                                                                                             Stellar
                      2
                                                                                             Gravity
                                                                                             History
                      1



                      0
                          1956-1965   1966-1975      1976-1985     1986-1995   1996-2005
                                                       Decade


Fig. 1 Production of African American astronomical researchers by field and decade


1956 and 2005. We note that there is at least one researcher that the authors are aware
of, whose detailed information (including his name) that we have lost. We see that
6 of these (∼21%) have been women. Whereas women constitute greater than 50%
of all African American college students, their representation in astronomy as com-
pared to male astronomers is about 5% lower than that of their White counterparts
who constitute only ∼26% of U.S. astronomers [19]. We also see that only 3 of the
21 astronomers (∼10%) attended a historically Black college or university (HBCU).
This is somewhat surprising considering that it has been estimated that ∼40% of
African American Ph.D. physicists attended HBCUs and that greater than 60% of
African American with graduate degrees in science, technology, engineering, and
math fields are HBCU graduates [20]. Another interesting statistic regarding the
participation of African Americans in professional astronomy is the connection be-
tween economic class and participation. All of the researchers in the table, with but


                                                                 cultural, 1        planetary, 0

                                                                                                     solar, 6
                                                  stellar, 5




                                         gravity, 4

Fig. 2 Production of African
American astronomical
researchers by field and
percentage                                                                                  extragalactic, 10
Participation and Research of Astronomers and Astrophysicists                                                      247

                       8

                       7

                       6

                       5

       # Astronomers                                                                         Theorist
                       4
         Produced                                                                            Experimentalist

                       3                                                                     Observer/Analyst
                                                                                             Historian
                       2

                       1

                       0
                           1956-1965   1966-1975   1976-1985   1986-1995    1996-2005
                                                    Decade


Fig. 3 Production of African American astronomical researchers by mode of research and decade


one known exception, originated from a middle class or better household. It is likely
that this trend holds across all ethnicities practicing astronomy.
    Figures 1 & 2 show the fields selected by African American astronomical re-
searchers by decade and percentage. We see that the recent period saw a large up-
swing in the number of researchers selecting extragalactic systems for study. This
reflects the broader trend in astronomy in general. Perhaps most surprising, not a
single African American astronomical researcher has chosen to study planetary or
extrasolar planetary systems thus far. This is especially surprising given the large
amount of activity in these research areas. Figures 3 & 4 show the primary modes of
research utilized by African American astronomical researchers in their work. An
interesting point is that of the four who have chosen to be experimentalists as their
primary mode of research, one was Dr. Walker and the other two are his students


                                                                           historian, 1
                                                                                                         theorist, 4
                                             experimentalist, 4




Fig. 4 Production of African
American astronomical
researchers by mode of
research and percentage                                                                 observer, 17
248                                                             H. M. Oluseyi, J. Urama

Dr. Ray O’Neal and Dr. Hakeem Oluseyi. We note, however, that researchers have
crossed over from their primary mode of operation and participated in other ac-
tivities. For example, both Dr. Leonard Strachan and Dr. Dara Norman have been
involved in experimental developments.



Participation and Research in Sub-Saharan Africa
Sub-Saharan Africa (a term that excludes the North African countries from the rest
of the continent) has close to 10% of the world’s population but contributes less
than 0.2% of professional astronomers in the world. The latest membership list of
the International Astronomical Union (www.iau.org) shows that of a total of 9773
members as of January 2007, The continent of Africa contributes only 142 members
made up of Algeria (3), Egypt (57), Ethiopia (1), Morocco (7), Nigeria (10) and
South Africa (64). The sub-Saharan African countries in the list are only South
Africa, Nigeria and Ethiopia. The only radio telescope in the continent of Africa,
at present, is the 26-m radio telescope in South Africa. Also, the other major as-
tronomical research facilities – optical and gamma-ray telescopes – in sub-Saharan
Africa are located in southern Africa (South Africa and Namibia). Again, among
the sub-Saharan African countries, it is only in a few Nigerian and South African
Universities that astronomy programs are offered.



Astronomy in Nigeria
Modern astronomy came into Nigeria only four decades ago. However, like ancient
people everywhere, Nigerians had always wondered at the sky and struggled to make
sense of it. So, while modern astronomy may be quite new – and not yet popular –
in Nigeria, ancient architecture, folklore, myths, religion, calendars, etc. are quite
rich in astronomy.
    One of the first major modern astronomy/space science activities in Nigeria was
the setting up of NASA’s space tracking facility in Kano in the early 1960s for
monitoring the missions of Gemini, Apollo, and Skylab spacecraft. In South Africa,
Australia, and other parts of the world, such NASA’s space tracking facilities meta-
morphosed into radio astronomy observatories but, unfortunately, were dismantled
in Nigeria. Astronomy, as a course, was first introduced in the Departments of Math-
ematics of the University of Nigeria, Nsukka, in 1962 by Dr. John Gaustad. He,
however, left Nigeria shortly after that following the break out of the Nigerian – Bi-
afran civil war that lasted from 1967 to 1970. Presently, there is no major astronomy
facility in Nigeria, and indeed in any other part of the West African sub-region. It
is, however, worthy of note that a Nigerian – Samuel Okoye – was the first black
African to obtain a doctorate in radio astronomy, and probably in astronomy gener-
ally. His doctoral research at the Mullard Radio Astronomy Observatory, University
of Cambridge (1962–1965), led to the discovery (with his supervisor, Dr. Tony
Participation and Research of Astronomers and Astrophysicists                     249

Hewish) of an extremely high brightness temperature source in the Crab Nebula
recognized as the first example of a neutron star [21]. This source later turned out
to be none other than the famous Crab Nebula Pulsar. The discovery was widely
recognized as being of fundamental importance to basic physics and for which Prof.
Hewish was awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1974.


Astronomy in Nigerian Universities
Presently Nigeria has nearly eighty (80) universities and several polytechnics but
the University of Nigeria, Nsukka remains the only one in which astronomy is of-
fered at all levels (B.Sc., M.Sc., Ph.D). In the early 1970s, Dr. Samuel Okoye and
his colleagues who had returned to the University of Nigeria, Nsukka, following
the Nigerian–Biafran civil war proposed and designed curricula for post-graduate
teaching and research in the four main physics sub-disciplines of Astrophysics,
Geophysics, Materials Science/Solid State Physics and Nuclear/High Energy Par-
ticle Physics. Later, when he became the Head of Department (1978–1981), he
took a further step of expanding the physics degree curriculum at the undergraduate
level to include astronomy as a mandatory course in the third year as well as fourth
year degree optional topics in astrophysics. It was therefore natural for a case to be
successfully made to Senate, the Governing Council, and the National Universities
Commission for the departmental name to be upgraded to “Department of Physics
and Astronomy,” thus becoming one of a handful of elite academic departments in
the world so named, and certainly the first one in Africa.
    Nigeria has produced 19 Ph.Ds in astronomy over its history. The University
of Nigeria has produced only 10 Ph.Ds in astronomy/astrophysics in the past two
decades. These are L.I. Onuorah (1984); C.E. Akujor (1985); M.W. Anyakoha
(1988); A.A. Ubachukwu (1991); G.C. Anene (1991); F.C.C. Anyaegbunam (1992);
I.E. Ekejiuba (1992); J.O. Urama (1999); A.E. Chukwude (2002) and R.N.C. Eze
(2004). Starting from the early 1990s, some other universities, especially in the
south-eastern Nigeria, started introducing postgraduate courses in astrophysics.
Already, the Nnamdi Azikiwe University, Awka, the Rivers State University of
Science & Technology, Port-Harcourt, and the Ebonyi State University, Abakaliki,
have each produced one Ph.D. These are A.C. Ugwoke, F.B. Sigalo, and E.O. Ekpe
respectively. Unfortunately, none of the universities in the northern and southwest-
ern Nigeria is running astronomy program at any level.


Nigerian Astronomical Facilities
With the initial radio telescope set up in Kano by NASA in 1960s already disman-
tled, Dr. Okoye set out towards the setting-up a radio observatory in Nsukka. He
arranged for a high quality 10 metre parabolic aluminum dish radio antenna (worth
US$50,000 at 1973 prices) to be donated by the Astronomy Department of the Uni-
versity of California, Berkeley to the University of Nigeria, Nsukka (UNN). This
was later followed up by a personal donation of one hundred thousand Naira (about
US$150,000 then) by Dr. Nnamdi Azikiwe, the founder and first Chancellor of UNN
250                                                              H. M. Oluseyi, J. Urama

and the first President of Nigeria, for astronomical research. Augmented by a further
UNN Senate research grant of fifty thousand Naira, Okoye and his group were able
to set up a 10-m dish operating at 327 MHz as the initial facility of the group. The
facility was commissioned by Dr. Nnamdi Azikiwe during the University’s silver
jubilee celebrations in 1985 and became known as the Nnamdi Azikiwe Space Re-
search Centre, Nsukka. However, there was no further support from the Nigerian
government or from any other source, and as a result no serious activity was taking
place around the telescope, which was situated in a remote corner of the University
(as is usual with radio instruments). Consequently, the dish and all the facilities were
vandalized.
   With the recent restoration of democratic governance in Nigeria, the National
Centre for Basic Space Science, Nsukka, was created, in 2000, under the leadership
of Prof. Pius Okeke – another foremost Nigerian astrophysicist. Part of the mandate
of the Centre is to conduct and carry out active frontline research in Atmospheric
Sciences and Astronomy. Earlier in November 1998, the African Regional Centre
for Space Science and Technology Education in English Language (ARCSSTE-E)
was established at Ile-Ife. Unfortunately, however, none of these Centres has any
astronomical facility for front-line research yet.

Astronomy and the Public
Astronomy remains largely unpopular in Nigeria. There are only about a dozen
professional astronomers and no amateur astronomers in a country of about 140
million people. Here, astronomy is seen to be of only esoteric interest and devoid
of any practical and economic value. The Astronomical Society of West Africa,
Nigerian block, was formed in 2004 and part of the efforts of the group would be to
create awareness and interest in astronomy.


Black African Astronomy in South Africa
Astronomy in South Africa began in 1751 with the observations of the Frenchman,
Abbe de Lacaille. It would not be until 2002 that the first Black Africans received
their Ph.Ds in astronomy in South Africa. Ramotholo Sefako, Thebe Medupe, and
Lerothodi Leeuw each earned their Ph.D. in that year.
    Dr. Leeuw received his Ph.D. in Astronomy from the University of Cape Town
studying dust in active galactic nuclei. He has since begun studying cold dust in
elliptical galaxies. He has held a couple of postdoctoral positions prior to his current
position as a Research Scientist at the University of Toledo in the U.S. Dr. Medupe
received a Ph.D. in Physics at the University of Cape Town studying oscillations
in stellar atmospheres, investigating the relationship between radiative transfer and
pulsations. He held a lectureship at the University of North West prior to taking
his current position as a Lecturer at the University of Cape Town. Dr. Medupe is
perhaps best known for starring in the documentary film Cosmic Africa. Dr. Medupe
is also an avid researcher in astronomy history, leading the Timbuktu Science project
Participation and Research of Astronomers and Astrophysicists                      251

which seeks to identify astronomical knowledge in ancient Arabic manuscripts from
Timbuktu, Mali. Dr. Sefako received a Ph.D. in Astronomy from the Space Physics
Unit of Potchefstroom, South Africa, studying neutron stars with very intense mag-
netic fields. After graduate school he worked briefly with Dr. Eric Wilcots of the
University of Wisconsin as a postdoctoral researcher. He is currently a staff member
at the South African Astronomical Observatory.
    The contributions of Africans living in Europe are limited to two persons known
to the authors. There is Jean Paul Mbelek, a native of Cameroon who resides in
France. He research work has involved theoretical work in cosmology and gravity,
closely matched to observational data. He also lectures on the history of science in
sub-Saharan Africa. The second researcher known to the authors resided in Russia
and is known simply as Bolotov. His work, as described by scholar Asa Davis was
also in the field of gravity. Unfortunately, we know little about this scholar or his
work.



Historians of the African Diaspora’s Astronomical Contributions

The Pioneers

Ms. Hattie Carwell was the author of the first book devoted to illustrating the contri-
bution of the African Diaspora to the sciences, including astronomy. Ms. Carwell’s
book, entitled Blacks in Science: Astrophysicist to Zoologist, was published in 1977.
Shortly thereafter the Afrocentric movement was took hold in the U.S. Its leader,
Dr. Ivan van Sertima, organized the movement and founded The Journal of African
Civilizations. Volume 5 of this journal, entitled Blacks in Science: Ancient and
Modern, was released in 1983. The next major works on the topic were presented
by Robert Fikes, Jr. He published an article entitled “Careers of African Ameri-
can Astronomers in Academics,” in The Journal of Blacks in Higher Education,
in Autumn 2000. With the advent of the World Wide Web, Dr. Scott Williams,
Professor of Mathematics at the State University of New York at Buffalo created
the website Astronomers of the African Diaspora, initially utilizing information
from the aforementioned sources and from Dr. Ronald Mickens, former Historian
of the National Society of Black Physicists (NSBP). The astronomers listed doubled
with contributions from Dr. Hakeem M. Oluseyi. In 2006 the effort to preserve and
disseminate the contribution of Africa and the African Diaspora to astronomy coa-
lesced in the founding of the African Cultural Astronomy Project, primarily due to
the efforts of Dr. Jarita Holbrook.



The African Cultural Astronomy Project
It has been argued that, “astronomy is more than the science of stars. It is intimately
connected to our ideas of ourselves, our purpose and place in the universe” [22].
252                                                                      H. M. Oluseyi, J. Urama




Fig. 5 Some of the people that gathered at the University of Cape Coast, Ghana, to watch the total
solar eclipse of March 29, 2006. Dr. Johnson Urama is holding the microphone while Dr. Herbert
Charles is facing him


Like ancient people everywhere, Africans wondered at the sky and struggled to
make sense of it. One of the greatest challenges of the Africa Cultural Astronomy
Project (more information at www.africastronomy.org) is being able to “scientifi-
cate” these knowledge of the sky possessed by Africans. One of the ways of achiev-
ing this is by making a conscious and systematic effort to bridge the gap between
cultural astronomy in Africa and the modern astronomy by providing scientific inter-
pretation for some rich and detailed ethnic cosmogonies. In different parts of Africa,
there are hundreds of ethnic cosmogonies and mythologies that need to be studied
more systematically. The main objectives of the project are to unearth the body of
traditional knowledge of astronomy by peoples of the different ethnic groups in
Africa; and to re-interpret this body of knowledge in the light of modern astronomy.
We hope that through this, we would be able to provide better insights into the
science behind ancient architecture, folklore, myths, religion, rituals, etc., and use
it as a very powerful tool for creating awareness and interest in modern astronomy
and space sciences generally.
    A good example of such ancient astronomy is that of the Dogon. The Dogon
is one of the ethnic groups in Mali, West Africa. The Dogon beliefs, supposedly
thousands of years old, include some knowledge of the star Sirius (8.6 light years
from the earth). Dogon priests said that Sirius had a companion star that was invis-
ible to the human eye. They also stated that the star moved in a 50-year elliptical
orbit around Sirius, that it was small and incredibly heavy, and that it rotated on its
axis. All these things happen to be true (the actual orbital figure is 50.04 +/–0.09
years). But what makes this so remarkable is that the companion star of Sirius,
called Sirius B, was first photographed in 1970. While people began to suspect its
existence around 1844, it was not seen through a telescope until 1862. The Dogon
Participation and Research of Astronomers and Astrophysicists                                 253




Fig. 6 Some of the people that gathered at the University of Cape Coast, Ghana, to watch the
total solar eclipse of March 29, 2006. From left to right Dr. Hakeem Oluseyi, Dr. Jarita Holbrook,
Dr. Thebe Medupe, and a University of Cape Coast student



name for Sirius B, Po Tolo, consists of the word for star (tolo) and “po”, the name of
the smallest seed known to them. By this name they describe the star’s smallness – it
is, they say, “the smallest thing there is.” They also claim that it is “the heaviest star,”
and white. The tribe claims that Po is composed of a mysterious, super-dense metal
called sagala, which they declare is heavier than all the iron on Earth. Not until 1926
did Western science discover that this tiny star is a white dwarf, a category of star
characterized by very great density. Many artifacts were found describing the star
system, including a statue that is at least 400 years old. The Dogon also describe a
third star in the Sirius system, called Emme Ya. Larger and lighter than Sirius B, this
star revolves around Sirius as well. Around the star Emme Ya orbits a planet. To date,
however, astronomers have not identified Emme Ya. Will our celestial observation
devices one day be powerful enough for us to find this legendary planet, thereby
adding still more mystery to the extraordinary – seemingly impossible – astronom-
ical knowledge of the Dogon? [Editor’s Note: There is gravitational evidence of a
third body, but it is Jupiter sized and thus not a star.] In addition to their knowledge
of the Sirius group, the Dogon mythology includes Saturn’s rings and Jupiter’s four
major moons. They have four calendars, for the Sun, Moon, Sirius, and Venus, and
have long known that planets orbit the sun.

Conclusions
As we have illustrated, the latter half of the 20th Century was revolutionary for
the participation of Africans and the African Diaspora in the astronomical research
enterprise. While the trend has been towards increased participation when averaged
254                                                                      H. M. Oluseyi, J. Urama

over the last 50 years, the numbers are not yet significant enough to assume a stable
population of Black astronomers that will continue into the future. National science
budgets are under pressure in both the U.S. and Nigeria. Political trends in the U.S.
suggest that anti-intellectualism, jingoism, and religiosity are on the rise. And while
most African Americans in science, technology, and mathematics careers are grad-
uates of historically Black colleges and universities (HBCUs), surprisingly few of
these institutions have astronomical curricula or facilities. What must be done to
combat these factors?
    Clear trends in the past success observed in Nigeria and the U.S. are collabora-
tions and connections with the broader astronomical community, while simultane-
ously developing strong mentoring relationships within the Black community. One
key to a successful career in science is exposure to research and its personnel very
early on in a person’s intellectual development. The process of mentoring young
undergraduate students – and even high school students seeking to pursue a techni-
cal college degree – is of enormous value, and is usually the method of exposure to
research which most successful scientists have been fortunate to have enjoyed. The
teaching and mentoring of the younger generations by the older ones is of utmost
importance to the advancement of all the sciences. The importance of role models
and teachers may be related to the findings of Lewis and Collins, which showed that
African American students were making the decision to stay or leave the sciences
based on (A) misinformation about what scientists do, and (B) what the lives of
scientists are like, among other factors [23].
    The development of collaborations and support networks is important not only
for maintaining the pipeline of Black astronomers and astrophysicists, it is also im-
portant for maintaining the careers of current researchers. Tighter research budgets
result in more scientists competing for fewer research dollars. As proposal funding
decisions are provided by the scientific community itself, it is of the utmost impor-
tance for Black scientists to focus on remaining connected and respected in order to
compete.
    If Black astronomers and astrophysicists are able to successfully maintain their
own careers, train and mentor the next generation, include the next generation in the
process of expanding knowledge, and inform the public of the cultural and scien-
tific contributions of Africans and the African Diasporadiaspora to astronomy and
astrophysics, we will be well positioned to be full participants in the next century of
discoveries.


References
 1. Rouse CA (1961) Ionization Equilibrium Equation of State. The Astrophysical Journal
    134:435
 2. Rouse CA (1969) Interior Structure of the Sun. Nature 224:1009
 3. Rouse CA (2000) Inverse and Forward Helioseismology: Understanding the Interior Composi-
    tion and Structure of the Present Sun. In: Manuel O, (ed) Origin of Elements in the Solar Sys-
    tem, Implications of Post-1957 Observations, Boston/Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic/Plenum
    Publishers, p. 317
Participation and Research of Astronomers and Astrophysicists                                  255

 4. Peery BF (1971) Technetium Stars. The Astrophysical Journal 163L:1
 5. Peery BE (1979) A List of Identifications in the Violet Spectrum of 19 Psc. Publications of the
    Astronomical Society of Japan 31:461–472
 6. Fix J (2005) Journey to the Cosmic Frontier. McGraw-Hill/Science/Engineering/Math
 7. Walker ABC, Rugge, HR (1967) Variation in the Solar X-Ray Line Spectrum below 25Å.
    Astronomical Journal 72:835
 8. Walker ABC, Lindblom JF, Barbee TW, Hoover RB (1988) Soft X-ray images of the solar
    corona with a normal-incidence Cassegrain multilayer telescope. Science 241:1781
 9. Walker ABC, Lindblom, JF, O’Neal RH, Allen MJ, Barbee TW, Hoover RB (1990) Multi-
    Spectral Solar Telescope Array. Optical Engineering 29:581
10. Carruthers GR, Page T (1972) Apollo 16 Far-Ultraviolet Camera/Spectrograph: Earth Obser-
    vations. Science 177:788
11. Basri G, Marcy GW, Graham JR (1996) Lithium in Brown Dwarf Candidates: The Mass and
    Age of the Faintest Pleiades Stars. The Astrophysical Journal 458:600
12. Agafanov M, Richards MT, Sharova O, (2006) Three-Dimensional Doppler Tomogram of Gas
    Flows in the Algol-type Binary U Coronae Borealis
13. Kempner JC, Richards MT (1999) Analysis of the Si iv Ultraviolet Spectra of U Sagittae. The
    Astrophysical Journal 512:345
14. Richards MR, Albright GE, Bowles LM (1995) The Astrophysical Journal 438:L103
15. Nallan P, Oluseyi HM (2002) Method of Etching Tungsten or Tungsten Nitride Electrode
    Gates in Semiconductor Structures. U.S. Patent #6,423,644
16. Oluseyi HM (2005) System, Method and Medium for Modeling, Monitoring and/or Control-
    ling Plasma Based Semiconductor Manufacturing Processes. U.S. Patent #6,943,503
17. Oluseyi HM, Walker ABC, Porter J, Hoover RB, Barbee TW (1999) Observation and Model-
    ing of the Solar Transition Region I: Multi-Spectral Solar Telescope Array Observations. The
    Astrophysical Journal 524:1105
18. Oluseyi HM (2007) The Wax Candle Flying Flame Phenomenon. manuscript in preparation
19. http://www.grammai.org/astrowomen/allstats.html
20. http://www.aps.org/apsnews/0502/050216.cfm
21. Hewish A, Okoye SE (1965) Evidence for an Unusual Source of High Radio Brightness Tem-
    perature in the Crab Nebula. Nature 207:59
22. Campion N. Introduction: Cultural Astronomy in Astrology and the Academy, ed. N. Campion
    (Bristol, Cinnabar Books, 2003) p. xv
23. Lewis B, Collins A (2001) Interpretive investigation of the science-related career decisions of
    three African-American college students. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 38:599
Index




Achaempong, Oheneba, 6, 11                        Bantu, 4
Africa                                            Basins of Africa, 31–32, 33–34
  kingdoms and empires, 35                        Basutu, 4
  physical features, 29–36                        Batammaliba, 4, 16, 190, 204
  population distribution, 37–38                  Bautu, 4
  rift valley of, 32                              Bemba, 4
African Cultural Astronomy Project, 10, 18,       Benin, 1
       251–253                                    Big dipper, 53, 59–60, 63, 67
African Skies, 85                                 Borana, 4
Akala, 48                                         Brown, Neville, 114
Alignments, 136–140                               Buxner, Sanlyn, 2, 12
Alnilam, 139–140
Alpha Centauri, 138–139
Amadioha, 213                                     Cabbala, 231
Amung-Ria, 129                                    Calendar circle, 133–135
Amun Ra, 123, 129                                 Calendars and timekeeping, 13
Ancestral, 129                                    Cambyses, 128
Animalu, Alexander, 6                             Campion, Nick, 11
Animism, 123                                      Canopus, 138–139
Anthropology of astronomy, 111                    Cape Coast, Ghana, 5, 9, 10
Anthropomorphic megaliths, 135                    Cassiopea, 60–61
Anyanwu, 214, 219–220, 235                        Cassirer, Ernst, 113
Archaeoastronomy, 1, 4, 6, 10, 15, 17, 39, 110,   Catal Huyuk, 141
       139–140                                    Cattle herders, 133
  alignments, 4, 13                               Celestial and Cosmic Art, 13
Arcturuws, 137–139                                Celestial and Cosmic Names, 13
Ashanti, 4                                        Celestial navigation, 13
Astrology, 109–117, 128                           Cemeteries, 140
  astrology and healing, 13                       Ceremonial center, 132
  divination, 13, 112, 194                        Chaga, 129
Axis mundi, 39                                    Chineke, 211
                                                  Chopi, 4
Babalawo, 194                                     Chukwu, 235
Babylon, 112                                      CNN, 5, 12
Bagamoyo, 124                                     Comets, 73
Bagnold, 134                                      Complex structures, 134–136
Baity, Elizabeth Chesley, 110                     Constellations, 53–68
Baleisis, Audra, 3                                  Akwu Okala (Cancer), 219
Bamana, 2, 4                                        Kaza maiyaya (Pleiades), 233


                                                                                   257
258                                                                                   Index

  Orion, 50                                    Horizon, 59–62
  zodiac, 67–68                                Husserl, Edmund, 115
Cos sculpture, 136
Cow sacrifices, 133–135                        Iambulus, 128
Creationism, 114                               Ibibio, 4
Culture and Cosmos, 111                        Idààcha-Yoruba cosmology, 189–205
Curry, Patrick, 116                            Igbo, 2, 4, 209–215, 234–235
                                                  calendar, 213, 235–237
Dating by celestial bodies, 13                    cosmogony, 211
Divination, 194–204                               mythology, 212–213
  Ifa divination, 190–204                         worldview, 209–210
Divine priests and cosmic kings, 13            Igwe, 211–212
Dogon, 3, 4, 190, 204                          Intelligent Design, 114
  astronomy of, 252–253                        Iraqw, 4
                                               Iruwa, 127
Eagleton, Terry, 113                           ISAAC (International Society for
Earth forces, 194                                      Archaeoastronomy and Astronomy
Earth-Moon-Sun system, 68, 97–98, 104                  in Culture), 10
EBASI (Edward Bouchet Abdus Salaam             Ivory, 140–141
      Institute), 5
Eclipse, 123                                   Ka’ba, 145–176
Egypt, 3, 112                                  Kant, Immanuel, 111
Egyptians, 4                                   Karanga, 4
Einstein, Albert, 5                            Khoisan (Bushmen), 4, 35
Eliade, Mircea, 113                            Kikuyu, 4
Enamel hyperplasia, 140                        Kilimanjaro, 129
Ethnoastronomy, 3, 6, 17, 109, 231             Kondoa, 122, 123
Ethnographic methods, 21–28                    Krupp, Ed, 116–117
Euhemerus, 128                                 Kuba, 4
Fatimid, 151, 161
                                               Lamba, 4
Folklore, myths and legends, 13
                                               Lampeter, University of Wales at, 109–110
Gebel Ramlah, 140                              Light
Geocentric view of planetary                     Ilé-Ifè (first light), 200
     orbits, 184–185                           Light and shadows, 73–74
Ghana, 1, 5, 6, 7, 9                           Lockyer, Norman, 3
Gingerich, Owen, 114                           Luba, 4
Gnomon, 39–50, 142                             Lunar eclipse, 69–71
Gnosticism, 112                                Luyia, 4
GPS, 136
Griaule, 3                                     Ma, 48
Greece, 112                                    Maison, Kofi, 6, 11
                                               Makalo, 127
Hangegraaff, Wouter, 113                       Malagasy, 4
Hausa, 4                                       Mali, 3
Hawkins, Gerald, 110                           Mamprusi, 4
Heaven, 39, 41, 49, 50, 95–96, 111–112, 184,   Mapela, 4
       195, 209–214, 234                       Masai, 4, 133
Heelas, Paul, 113                              Mawe matatu, 126
Hematite dust, 140                             Maya, 43
Herero, 4                                      Mbunda, 4
Herodutus, 128                                 Megalithic alignments, 134–142
Hill, Jane, 5                                   stellar association of, 136–139
Hlubi, 4                                       Megalith builders, 134
Index                                                                                    259

Mensah, Samuel Yeboah, 5                         Qayrawan, 153–160, 172, 176
Meteor shower, 67, 73, 182                       Qibla, 145–176
Mica, 140–141
Mihrab, 145, 148, 153                            Radio carbon dating, 133, 136, 140
Moon, 68                                         Redan, 127
 apparent motion, 69                             Ru’at El Baqar, 133
 gender, 218, 222, 233                           Ruggles, Clive, 6, 11, 110, 116
 metonic cycle, 69
 Onwa, 213–214                                   Sagala, 253
 phases, 68–69, 98–103, 213                      San, 4
Morehouse College, 5                             Sandawe, 2, 4
Muleba, 124                                      Sandawe sun myth, 219
Mursi, 4                                         Saunders, Nicholas, 110
Musi, 122                                        Shona, 4
                                                 Shooting stars, 214
Nabta Playa, 39–41                               Sirius, 4, 138–9
  astronomy of, 131–142                          Sirius star, 4
Nairuz, 122                                      Snedegar, Keith, 6
Nairuz festival, 122                             Solar eclipse, 1, 9–12, 65–67, 77, 83,
Namoratunga, 125                                        95–105, 192
Namoratunga stone circles, 125–126, 128–129      Solstice, 133, 142
Naron, 4                                         Somali, 4
Ndembu, 4                                        Sophia Center, 111
New Age, 111, 116                                Sotho-Tswana, 4
Ngas, 4                                          South Africa, 6
Nigeria, 1, 6                                    Star names
Nomadic pastoralists, 133, 139–141                  Emme Ya, 253
NSBP (National Society of Black Physicists), 5      Po Tolo (Sirius B), 253
NSF (National Science Foundation), 5                Rohini (Aldebaran), 50
Nuer, 4                                          Steiner, Rudolf, 111
Nyabungu, 4                                      Stirling, Alphonse, 5
Nyasa, 4                                         Stonehenge, 3
                                                 Sun, 26, 34, 39–45, 48–50, 61–71, 102–104,
Obatala, 193, 197–200, 233                              121–129, 142, 192, 214, 217–228,
Oduduwa, 193, 197–204, 234                              233, 244
Ogboni, 198, 202, 203–204                        Sun dagger, 73–74
Onu-anyanwu, 219–220                             Sun gazing, 218
Onwa, 213–214                                    Sun gender, 218, 233
Opata, Damian, 6                                 Sun-God, 124
Orisha cult, 199                                 Sun-god worship, 121–129, 214, 219–221
Oxford Conferences, 1                            Sun/Moon symbols, 122–124
                                                 Swahili, 4, 122
Panchea, 128                                     Swazi, 4
Penrose, Roger, 112                              Syncretism, 129
Phenomenology, 115–116
Planisphere, 54                                  Tabwa, 4
Plato, 112, 115                                  telescope, 3
Platt, Tristan, 111                              Thom, Alexander, 110
Polaris, 39, 47, 61, 63–64                       Tilapia, 140
Prajapati, 48, 50                                Tilley, Christoper, 113
Precession, 137                                  Togo, 1
Prehistoric herdsmen, 133, 139–141               Tsonga, 4
Purusha, 48, 50                                  Tulup beakers, 140
Pygmies, 4                                       Turquoise nose plug, 140
260                                                                   Index

UNESCO, 7, 10                    Xhosa, 4
Urama, Johnson, 6
                                 York, Michael, 109, 113
Valley of sacrifices, 133–136    Yoruba, 2, 4, 189–205
Varuna, 48, 50                   Yoruba cosmology, 189–205, 233–234
Venda, 4                         Yoruba traditional calendar, 193
Vishnu, 48, 50
Visvakarman, 48                  Zande, 4
                                 Zimbabwe, 3
Writing, signs and symbols, 13   Zulu, 4
